Skip to main content
 
Texts
 
Video
 
Audio
 
Software
 
Images
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
About Blog Projects Help Donate  Contact Jobs Volunteer People
Full text of "Bhagwatamrit Ebook"
See other formats
Bhagwatamrit 

The Elixir of the Bhagwat 
Discourses 

By 

Swami Akhandanand Saraswati 



Edited by : Swami Govindanad Sarswati 



Compiled by Smt. Satishbala Mahendralal Jethi 
Translated by Smt. Purnima L. Toolsidass 

2 



Published by- 
Satsahitya Prakashan Trust 
'Vipul' 28/16, B. g. Kher Marg 
Malabar Hill Mumbai 1 10 006 
Ph: 23682055 



Printed by - 

Surya Print Process Pvt. Ltd., 
9/54, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi - 1 10 
Ph: 51005051, 1,2,3,4 



Shri Harih 



Blessings 

A fourteen day discourse by our Sad Gurudev, Pujya Swami Shri Akhandanand 
Saraswatiji Maharaj, was held in the Navratri of the Shravan of 1980. Talks were held 
every evening at the Birla Mandir Park in India's Capital, New Delhi. These public talks 
were organized by Shri Laxminivas Birla. 

Pujya Maharajshri had, in the short period of the above mentioned session, given the 
audience an appealing and exceptional glimpse of his eloquence, learning and experience 
of this voluminous literary work, the Shrimad Bhagwat Mahapurana. 
The talks were published in a book titled 'Bhagwatamrit', in 1981, and were welcomed 
wholeheartedly by avid readers all over India. Four editions have been printed due to 
popular demand. 

Due to repeated requests by the English speaking public, the Sat Sahitya Prakashan Trust 
acquiesced to my request to publish an English version of 'Anand Ullas', for the benefit 
of these who prefer to read English. Not only did the readers appreciate Pujya 
Maharaj shri 's thoughts, but it inspired the Pune based devotee couple, Smt. Sarli and Shri 
Laxman Sabnani to appeal to me, to be allowed to render the service of sponsoring the 
translation of one more of Pujya Maharaj shri 's literary works. This couple has been 
receiving the Grace of Pujya Maharajshri for long. 

I gave the task to Smt.Purnima L.Toolsidass, as she had translated 'Anand Ullas'. She is 
a disciple of Pujya Maharajshri, and has boundless devotion for him. She began the 
translation immediately, with great joy. The book comes to your hands as a result of her 
tireless effort. I have full faith that reading, and contemplating upon this work will bring 
fulfillment to your lives, because of Sad Gurudev's enthralling style and rendering. 
My heartfelt blessings to Purnima, and to the devotee couple, Smt. Sarli and Shri Laxman 
Sabnani, for their contributions. May they be inspired to continue to contribute thus, 
through the Sat Sahitya Prakashan Trust, for the benefit of mankind. 
Finally, I bless Shri Rajeev Bathra, who is a prime devotee of Pujya Maharajshri, and has 
organized the exquisite presentation and printing of this book. 

I pray to the Paramatma, the Father of us all, that Pujya Maharaj shri 's words may 
continue to reach people all over the world, and people everywhere may derive the 
benefits they bestow. 

Vrindavan Omkaranand 
Makar Sankranti 
14 th January 2005. 



4 



Ever Loving Memory ol our Dear ParL-niN 




Shrec and Shreniaii Khcmchand Danlairam Sahnani . 




Shrcc and ShreuinEiti Thidkurdiss Tuljaram Mahtani 



FOREWORD 



The Shrimad Bhagwat Mahapurana is a highly respected treatise of eighteen thousand 
verses. It has been a tradition, for the devoted Hindus, to have a seven day discourse of 
the Shrimad Bhagwat. It is believed that this gives salvation to the departed soul. A real 
challenge for a scholar would lie in his ability to expound upon the contents of the 
Bhagwat. Param Pujya Maharajshri was renowned, amongst other things, for being an 
authority on this most respected part of our scriptures. 

The Shrimad Bhagwat opens at the end of the Mahabharata. To understand the contexts 
with greater clarity, one needs a background of that famous epic. Shri Vedavyas is 
believed to have written the Mahabharata and also the eighteen Puranas, of which the 
Bhagwat is one. Some people, who are not well versed with our scriptures, tend to mix up 
the Bhagwat with the Bhagwat Gita, which is a part of the Mahabharata. The respect 
commanded by the Shrimad Bhagwat Mahapurana is due to the fact that it reveals the 
highest and best of the substance of our scriptures, philosophies and sciences. It has a 
holistic approach to life and gives clear and positive directions on the right attitudes for 
every good fortune, and every misfortune. Although the emphasis is on Bhakti, it carries 
the reader or listener, right up to the highest philosophy of the Vedas and enlightenment, 
without losing an iota of Bhakti, and without making us impractically idealistic. 
The importance accorded to the Shrimad Bhagwat Mahapurana, arises from the fact that 
it presents the highest Bhakti, harmonized and synthesized with Gnan. It is this unique 
characteristic, which is presented so distinctly and appealingly by Maharajshri, which 
gives this Purana the special status of being called the verbal form of the Lord. 
It is only by the Grace of my Guru, Swami Akhandanandji Maharaj, (and the loving 
inspiration of Swami Omkaranand Saraswatiji) that this translation of a short 
commentary of this great work could be presented to those who seek a deeper and richer 
existence, and a higher goal. Pujya Maharajshri had an amazing ability to express the 
most difficult subjects, and bring them within the scope of interest and understanding for 
those who are new to spiritual philosophy. His genius lay also in the fact that he made the 
driest subject come alive, and showed us how religion is an applied science for a finer 
level of existence, which is more satisfying, less hassle some, and more contributory to 
an ethical social order. While Maharajshri could elaborate at length, without becoming 
repetitive or dull, he could - with equal ease - speak in brief, with equal depth, and with 
fresh insights, on any given subject - no matter how often he spoke upon it. He was 
known for his skill for keeping within the subject chosen, and his masterly rounding off, 
exactly on the dot of the stipulated time, and his personal emotional link with each 
attentive listener. To hear people marvel that the questions in their hearts were answered 
during his talks, was a common phenomenon, which ceased to surprise anyone who heard 
him speak a couple of times. 

A Saint like Maharajshri is rare indeed - and through him, we came to know a little of the 
other great Saints he knew! The readers will know that it is he who speaks, and will be 
enriched by Maharajshri's abounding grace, because grace continues, even when Saints 
leave physically. Any shortcoming or mistake (in the translation) is entirely due to the 
lacking of the instrument, and for this, I seek the reader's pardon. I know that just as I 
have had the experience of Maharajshri's grace - which is not separate from the Grace of 



7 



the Lord - so can every person who enters this rendering with faith, and an open heart. A 
sincere seeker will experience equally, the same divine Grace, which is so familiar to 
those who came into contact with Maharajshri, even once! 



Purnima L.Toolsidass 

Kolkata. 

August 2004. 



8 



INDEX 



Blessings (4) 

Foreword (7) 

Maharaj shri - A Brief Introduction (10) 

Pravarchan 1 (12) 

Pravarchan2 (31) 

Pravarchan 3 (52) 

Pravarchan 4 (75) 

Pravarchan 5 (97) 

Pravarchan 6 (117) 

Pravarchan 7 (145) 

Pravarchan 8 (169) 

Pravarchan 9 (193) 

Pravarchan 10 (216) 

Pravarchan 1 1 (246) 

Pravarchan 12 (279) 

Pravarchan 13 (304) 

Pravarchan 14 (331) 

Glossary (353) 



9 



Maharaj Shri - A Brief Introduction. 



The region of Varanasi is considered to be amongst the holiest regions in India. Swami 
Akhandanandji Saraswati, whom we generally refer to as Maharaj Shri, was born on 
Friday, 25 th July, 1911, in this region, in a village called Maharai, in the lineage of 
Saryupaareen Brahmins. This was exactly nine months after his Grandfather had prayed 
to Shri Shantanu Behari, the Lord of Vrinadavan. According to the lunar calendar, it was 
the Amavasya of the month of Shravan, in the Samvat 1968. Since the baby's birth was 
by the Grace of the Lord, he was named Shantanu Behari. 

Famous and learned astrologers predicted that the baby's lifespan was only nineteen 
years. Fear of death made Maharaj Shri move towards the path to spirituality. All the 
great Saints and Sages stated clearly, that they could not save a person from his destined 
death, but they could certainly impart the Knowledge which would remove all fear of 
death forever. And, that is exactly what happened. The Nectarine Brahman manifested in 
Maharaj Shri's heart, and the dark shadow of death was gone forever. 

Maharaj Shri went to Jhusi, to meet Brahmachari Prabhudattaji, who has acquired great 
renown. It was there that he first saw Shri Udiyababaji Maharaj, and had the opportunity 
to discuss Vedanta. Maharaj Shri was captivated by Baba's conviction in the principle of 
Non-dual Reality, and by the unique, carefree bliss of this liberated soul. Baba showered 
unstinted filial love on Maharjshri. It was by his inspiration that Maharaj Shri became a 
Monk, and received initiation from the Shankaracharya of Jyotishpeeth, Swami Shri 
Brahmanandji Saraswati. Before he was initiated, Maharaj Shri worked for seven years, 
on the editorial board of the Kalyan publications of Gorakhpur. 

Maharaj Shri was ten, when his Grandfather made him read the original Bhagwat in 
Sanskrit. Since then, the Shrimad Bhagwat stayed by him, like a faithful companion. 
Maharaj Shri was an authority on Vedantic philosophy, and all the Indian scriptures. Hiss 
daily discourses were filled with his own inner joy, and continued unbroken until the 
evening of 17 th November, 1987. Even today, those who love to listen to discourses, 
obtain the joy of watching and listening to his audio-visual recordings, and reading his 
books. 

At about two am, the Brahmbela of 19 th November 1987 (the Margasheersha Krishna 
Trayodashi of the lunar calendar) the individual space merged into the universal space, 
and Maharaj Shri became All-pervading. 

Maharaj Shri's life clearly showed his equal love and goodwill towards all he met, 
regardless of their religious background, their level of intelligence, sex, age, or social 
status. Each person who met him received what his heart desired. Maharaj Shri continued 
to bestow lavishly, all the four Purasharthas, and even the Pancham Purushartha, Bhakti. 

The Anand Vrindavan Ashram established by Maharaj Shri is - in the holy city of 
Vrindavan - akin to the Teertharaj Prayag, where the three streams of Karma, Bhakti, and 



10 



Gnan are merged. The activities of the Ashram include Satsang, serving the Lord in 
temples, serving the cows and Monks, teaching the Vedas to young students, a charitable 
dispensary, etc. Maharaj Shri also started the memorable practice of celebrating the birth 
anniversaries of all the great Acharyas, bringing together the teachings of different 
traditions. This is a perfect example of his magnanimous outlook. 



11 



BHAGAWATAMRIT 
The Elixir of the Bhagwat 
By 

Swami Akhandanandji Saraswati 

Pravarchan I 
Skandha I 

Shri Uddhavji Maharaj pleaded with the Lord, "Lord, You will disappear 
when You have achieved Your mission for the sake of Your devotees, and 
after having given them Bliss. Then, how will people derive the benefits 
given by Your presence, Your Leela * and the Dharma* propagated by 
You?" ' 

The Lord Shri Krishna said, "Uddhavji, in the past, whenever I disappeared, 
I would go either to My abode, Vaikunth, or to the Ksheersagar*. This time, 
however, I will not go to either of these, I will immerse into the ocean of the 
Shrimad Bhagwat." 

%ftWT ^feits4 #q^|J|c|dl^c|H I 

Tirodhaaya pravishtoayam shrimadbhaagawataarnavam. 

Therefore, although the Lord Shri Krishna vanished from sight, He 
established Himself in the nectarine ocean of the Shrimad Bhagwat. It is His 
verbal image which we have before us now. 

Te «e yam vaangmayee moortih pratyaksham vartate " hare 7*. 

Even today, we can imbue the same elixir, by listening to the Shrimad 
Bhagwat Mahapuran*, which the Lord's devotees drank all through their 
five sense organs, when the Lord dwelt on earth as Shri Krishna. This bliss 
is not a remote, unseen factor. It is a physical experience, because the Lord 
Shri Krishna has not left us and gone to some other realm. He did not just 
disappear. He manifested His very Self in the form of the Shrimad Bhagwat. 



12 



Therefore, when the question arose, as to whom this nectarine Bhagwat 
should be given to - should it be given to Parikshit or should it be given to 
the demigods of heaven - Shri Shukadevaji rejected the demigods, in favor 
of Parikshit. How different are the two types of elixir! There can be no 
comparison between the divine elixir of the Bhagwat, and the nectar of the 
demigods. 

We will first consider a worldly viewpoint, which is worth noting. After 
traveling all over the world, Naradaji came to the region called 'Bharat'*, 
where religion was said to reign supreme. He visited many centers of 
pilgrimage, but nowhere did he find peace. Nor did he find true happiness, 
or true righteousness. He was deeply agitated when he finally came to the 
banks of the Yamuna, in Vrindavan, and here, he had a diving vision. He 
saw something, which can generally never be glimpsed by common people. 
You see, Bhakti*, Gnan* and Vairagya* are all feelings which have no 
visible physical form. We can only feel the emotion; never see the physical 
form of these feelings. It is in the heart that Bhakti, Gnan and Vairagya 
appear. No one in this world can experience a physical manifestation of 
these ethereal demigods. 

However, when Naradaji came to Vrindavan, even the ethereal became the 
gross, feelings took on forms. He saw that Bhakti was young, here, but her 
sons, Gnan and Vairagya, were aged. The significance of this is that the 
people of Vrindavan have a lot of devotion for the Lord, but scant respect for 
Knowledge, and hardly any Detachment either. The people had accepted 
Bhakti without Gnan or Vairagya. 

Naradaji realized that Bhakti can never be total, if there is no knowledge and 
no detachment. Without the requisite knowledge and detachment, what 
would be the object of devotion? He saw that there was no visualization of 
the Lord, who is the object of devotion, no knowledge about Him, and there 
is a lack of detachment from the worldly factors which prevent us from 
turning towards the Lord. Love for God requires detachment, to enable us to 
free ourselves from worldly attachments. 

But Naradaji saw no sign of Vairagya or Gnan being awake. Both of them 
are the sons - the fruits - of Bhakti. When Bhakti enters the heart, we begin 
to acquire Knowledge about the object of our devotion, and we rise above 
the duality of worldly attachments and aversions. Vairagya is the state when 
attachments and aversions are either absent, or negligible. A love for one, 
and a hatred for another, results in those we love (or hate) taking the place of 
the Lord in our hearts. Then we are unable to glimpse the Lord in our heart. 
We see, instead, the hated enemy or the beloved friend. Worldly factors thus 
encroach upon the territory which belongs to the Lord. This is why worldly 



13 



attachments and devotion to God can never go hand in hand. It is essential 
that only the pure beauty of the Lord shines in our heart. 
The lack of peace in this world troubled Naradaji. He was distressed by the 
friction, conflicts, and intense passions which prevailed even in the 
pilgrimages. The deficiency in Bhakti, her restlessness and lack of joy, made 
him even more unhappy. Hearing her pleas for help, Naradji began to 
contemplate, seeking to find a way to make her happy and fulfilled. Just 
then, he heard a celestial voice telling him that he would be free of his own 
sorrow, Bhakti would be free of her troubles, and Gnan and Vairagya would 
be roused from their stupor, when he (Naradji) met some sages who would 
give him the solution. 

Hearing this, Naradaji took recourse at the feet of his Gurus, the Sanakadis*. 
These four, Sanak, Sunandan, Sanatan, and Sanatkumar, are sages whose 
virtues have been extolled repeatedly in the Shrutis*. They dispelled 
Naradaji' s sorrow by explaining the essence of true philosophy. This episode 
is well clarified in the Chandogya Upanishad. The Sanakadis advised that 
Bhakti, Gnan and Vairagya would be fully awakened, if they listened to the 
Shrimad Bhagwat. They then narrated the Bhagwat, to bring full 
consciousness to Bhakti, Gnan and Vairagya. 

This is not, primarily, a Bhagwat* Purana - that is, it is not mainly about 
Bhagwan* - it is a Bhagwat*, mainly about the devotees of the Lord - 
Purana. ^'Niini tjtft ^ttwn^fft Bhagavataanaam puraanam 
bhaagavatapuraanam. That, in which the description of the Lord's devotees 
exceeds the descriptions of the Lord, is called the Bhagwat Purana. The Lord 
has, Himself, spoken about the great qualities of His devotees, and therefore 
- TOU ^fftfr bhagavataa proktam - grammatically becomes 
'bhagavatam '. The Bhagwat is, therefore, the Lord's own description of the 
wonderful qualities of His devotees. 

The thrust of the message of the Bhagwat is that Creation is created by God, 
within Himself, and will dissolve in Him. Whatever is created within 
something is sustained within it, and is not separate from it. Thus, the 
creation we see is not separate from the God whose creation it is. It is His 
play, His Leela, His pleasure and His frolic. 

What actually are the attractions and aversions we experience? We begin to 
favor those we like and sacrifice our integrity to help loved ones. We 
become unjust. Our love makes us partial to some, and sullies our heart. Our 
dislike turns into hatred and anger. We become violent and rebellious. Hate 
burns our heart to cinders. Attachment and aversion to any worldly factor 
vitiate our heart. Instead of an individual, we see an enemy or a friend. As a 



14 



result, we forget to see the Lord who is the base of all creation, just as gold 
is the base for all ornaments, and iron the base of all iron instruments, 
figures, etc. Instead of being full of love, our hearts are filled with hatred. 
The divine truth taught by the Shrimad Bhagwat is that we should focus 
upon the Lord who abides in every heart, in every thing, and in every place. 
This is the method for purifying our hearts. Nobody on earth can create 
goodwill through threat of punishment; fear of the Police, or of the Army, or 
the Law. People are troubled by the problems of the world. They ask, "Why 
is the world so full of negative tendencies, sorrow and strife?" This question 
has only one answer. It is because people have forgotten the Lord, the main 
cause of all Creation. When a person forgets God, there remains no place in 
his heart for Dharma* to linger. 

The main question raised in the Shrimad Bhagwat is, ^FT: % "HrT: 
"Dharmah kam shararam gatah ". Where can we find Dharma today? Who 
protects Dharma? The answer is that God, Himself, is the instigator, 
protector and reward of Dharma. When people lose their love for God, when 
they no longer feel devotion for Him, when they lack faith, then their mind 
is divided into hundreds of worldly considerations. So, sharpen your vision. 
Purify it to the extent where your mind is not distracted, and you can see the 
Lord in everyone. Realize, that the person who causes sorrow, gives 
detachment. When someone makes us happy, he is ensnaring us in worldly 
factors. That is why we should be cautious about how we see the world. In 
the chapter which explains the importance of the Shrimad Bhagwat, it is 
clarified that - for those who wish to purify their minds - there is no better 
method than listening to the Bhagwat. 

E^tasmaat aparam kinchinmanah shuddhayai na vidyate\ 

This Bhagwat has come with the purpose of purifying people's minds. A 
pure mind has pure desires, and when our desires are pure, our interaction 
with others will also be unsullied. This way, the whole world can be filled 
with joy and comfort, as the minds of more and more individuals get 
purified. 

This is the message brought by the Shrimad Bhagwat. It awakens, in the 
hearts of those who hear or read it, the Knowledge which drives away all sin 
and sorrow. Sorrow is a result of sin, and the Shrimad Bhagwat dispels both. 
At the very beginning of the Shrimad Bhagwat, it is written: 



15 



Taapatrayavinaashaaya shrikrishnaaya vayam numah. 

Sin is an instrument, an action resulting in sorrow. Any effort which results 
in sorrow is called 'paapa'*. Indulgence in paapa brings suffering. It is true 
that we can not indulge in sin when we sit down to hear the Bhagwat. This 
listening will help to free us from sin. But - what about the suffering which 
is bound to accrue from past sins? As a matter of fact, even that suffering is 
quietened when you begin to listen to the Bhagwat. This is why it is said: 

Wtffc ^T: fliddW ^«TT ?RcT I I 

Pravishtah karnarandhre ^na svaanaam bhaavasaroruham, 
Dhunoti shamalam krishnah salilasya yathaa sharat. 

As soon as the Lord enters your heart through the opening in your ears, He 
will remove all the impurity therein. 

You may be aware of this fact - and, incase you are not, you will now 
realize - that it is not possible to recognize, or identify, what you see before 
you, unless you possess previous knowledge about it. Unless someone has 
told you about it, you can't even know the things you see every day. The 
sense organs cannot provide the information you need. You can understand 
only when told by someone. Therefore, just as the eyes give you information 
about the appearance of what is before you, words give information about 
that which you don't know. What I mean is that by listening to the Shrimad 
Bhagwat, you can remove the sins and sorrows, which you did not know 
how to escape from. 

One more point. Can we acquire water by just wanting it? Naturally not! 
Water is far away, it is inanimate, and it does not even know that we want it. 
But, that's not the case with God, because He is not far from us. God is 
where the desire (for Him) is. When He sees, "This man desires Me", the 
Lord who is behind the desire enters into our wish for Him. Water is not 
aware that it is desired, but God is aware when He is desired. Therefore, 
when we feel an impulse to go to Him, to listen to the Kathaa* on the frolics 
of the Lord Vrinadavanbehari, Shri Krishna, we don't have to go anywhere. 
The Lord manifests as soon as we wish to go to Him. Shukadevji Maharaj 
says, "Look, this is the bank of the Yamuna, and this is the Vata tree, under 
which the Lord Shri Krishna stood and played the flute, with one foot 
crossed behind the other. He was wearing golden colored robes, and there 
was a faint smile on His blue-hued countenance. His eyes were full of love, 



16 



and He beckoned us, saying, "Come, come, My beloved, come to Me." Just 
see His smile! Just see His beauty! Come, let us listen to the talks upon His 
Leela - His frolics." 

So, as soon as the desire to hear about the Lord enters your heart, the Lord 
slips into that desire and takes a seat in your heart. The moment the Lord 
enters, your enemy will run away, your friend will leave, all worldly 
relationships will disappear. Only the Lord, Himself, will remain in your 
heart. The Shrimad Bhagwat states: 

Sadyo hridyavaruddhyate ^atra kritibhih shushrushubhistatkshanaat. 

No effort is more worthwhile than listening to the Kathaa. The Lord 
manifests in our heart just by our listening about Him. Our eyes fill with 
tears, our throat gets choked with emotion, our body begins to tingle, and 
right before our eyes, at that very moment, wherever we are sitting, and in 
the exact form which has just been described, the Lord appears and begins to 
play. 

That is why the Shrimad Bhagwat is said to be the sum total of the essence 
of all our scriptures. It says, "Take, my brother, if you want Advait*, or 
Dvaitadvait* or Shuddhadvait*." 

But, do you know what happened one day, when Shukadevaji Maharaj 
wandered around and came and sat at the foot of the Kalpataru* of the 
Vedas? The Vedas asked him, "Mahatmaji, what do you desire?" 
Shukadevaji replied that he did not desire anything. "I just -<<wm*1 few#T 
s^fti «j<sHi*He> svaprakaashe^ chidatmani brahmani sukhamaasahe^ - sit in 
the bliss of my self-illumination, which is none other than the realization of 
the Brahman. Why should I desire anything?" 

The Kalpavriksha* said, "You came and sat beneath me. How can I allow 
such a guest, who is a form of the Brahman, to depart without a gift from 
me? Here - take the best of my delicious fruits - fwiWT?Tfl#rT?T W 
nigamakalpatarorgalitam falam - I give you this. It will become even 
sweeter by the touch of your lips." 

That is why Vyasji has said, 1w w <<hihm4 Tft^T *j£r *n^T: " 
Pibata bhaagavatam rasaamaalayam muhuraho rasikaa bhuvi 
bhaavukaah ". It is an invitation to those who love good things, and also to 
those who desire heavenly joys after death. All are welcome to come and 
partake of happiness in this life itself. 



17 



See, Dharma gives unseen results, but the fruit of Bhakti is visible. The joy 
of devotion for the Lord, the joy of remembering Him, worshipping Him, 
chanting His name - all these joys are instantly given by Bhakti. Moreover, 
it moulds the Antahkaran* in such a way that we also obtain the joys of 
heaven after death. Gnan dispels vanity, and Bhakti accompanies us to 
whichever worlds we go to. 

This is why we have the descriptions about giving up knowledge after our 
nescience has been dispelled - gnanam cha mayi sanngast. 

This knowledge is not something separate from God; nor is there any need to 
differentiate between the Lord and Knowledge about Him. Bhakti, however, 
is such a quality that it abides before we meet Him, remains when we meet 
Him, and stays even after we have met Him. The purpose of Bhakti is to 
bring sweetness into our lives. 

Bhakti is described in the Shrimad Bhagwat, for our benefit in this world, as 
well as in the next world, and also for giving us instantaneous experience of 
the essence of the Lord. That is why it is said, about the Shrimad Bhagwat: 

Yasyaam vai shruyamaanaayaam krishne^ paramapurushe\ 
Bhaktirutpadyate^ punsah shokamohabhayaapahaa. 1.7.7. 

So come, listen to the Shrimad Bhagwat. Bhakti will enter, and remain 
seated in your heart while you listen, and then past experiences will sadden 
you no more. The possibilities of what the future may bring will no longer 
frighten you, and you will get detached from all worldly attachments. So, for 
those who wish to purify the antahkaran, there is no better way - indeed, no 
other way - than the Shrimad Bhagwat. 

Now let us cast a quick glance over the chapters of the Shrimad Bhagwat. 
You have to realize that the Bhagwat contains eighteen thousand verses, 
composed of thirty-two letter words, in the metre called the Anushtup 
Chanda. The time we have is approximately twenty or twenty-one hours. It 
takes at least thirty hours to read just the Sanskrit verses. Even those who 
routinely read the Bhagwat can not read it faster. The best we can do, under 
the restraint of time, is to cast a flying glance upon the Bhagwat. You must 
view the Shrimad Bhagwat this way. 

The first Skandha* of the Bhagwat is called the 'Adhikari* Skandha'. It 
describes the qualities of the one who gives the discourse, and of those who 
listen to it. When a ritual worship is undertaken for after-life happiness, it is 
called a 'pariplava' undertaking. In such a ritual, there has to be a 



18 



yajamana*, and his associates. Stories from the Puranas* are narrated to 
them, as part of the ritual. The priest doing the actual ritual make this a part 
of the worship, so that the minds of the people do not stray away from the 
main objective, into worldly thoughts and conversation. It is often the 
Bhagwat which is narrated. 

Here, the Shaunakadi* sages, which have undertaken the yagya, also listen 
to the Bhagwat. Because of this, the ritual is completed successfully. At the 
end, Sutaji, who is the speaker, develops Bhakti, and so do the Shaunakadi 
sages. In fact, Shaunakji develops such a strong feeling of devotion that he 
says: 

Karmanyasminnaashvaase " dhoomadhoomraatmanaam bhavaan, 
Aapaayayati govindapaadapadmaasavam madhu. 

"We are engrossed in a ritual worship like the Yagya. The smoke rises up 
and enters our mouth, nostrils, and eyes. It engulfs our antahkaran. You, 
however, sweeten our hearts with description of the nectar of the Lord's 
lotus-like feet, which have the sweetness of honey." This is how Shaunakji's 
heart gets filled with Bhakti when he listened to the Puranas. 
However, the Bhagwat was heard only as a part of the main ritual, of the 
Yagya. That made the Yagya the primary, and the Bhagwat the secondary 
purpose. The speaker was Suta, and the listeners were the Shaunakadi sages. 
Let us examine the next pair of speaker and listener of the Bhagwat. Eager to 
do whatever would benefit people, Vyasji divided the Vedas. He wrote the 
Brahmasutras to clarify the purport of the Upanishads. He wanted that even 
common people should be able to grasp the essence of life, righteous living, 
desires, wealth, and even liberation from the cycles of birth and death. This 
is why he wrote the Mahabharata - ^^^\<^^sarvaarthaparivrihitam. Not 
a single subject has been left out in the Mahabharata -^FTf^T H rlr^rf^RT 
yanne ^hasti na tatkvachit. 

No wonder that it is said, «-n*i)fc">i ^TcT ^ff^T " Vyasochishtam jagat sarvam ". 
There has never been, and never will be, any epic to compare with the 
Mahabharata. 



19 



Even after completing seventeen Puranas, Vyasji felt that he had not 
completed his life's work. For the benefit of mankind, he began to write the 
Bhagwat. 

The goal of mankind remains unfulfilled without the Bhagwat. Nor can 
mankind attain peace of mind. The dialogue between Narada and Vyas is 
given to explain this. 

The sage Narada loves the Lord deeply. He is a devotee, so close to the 
Lord, as to be another form of the Lord. The Lord created Brahmaji*, so that 
he could create the universe, direct it with natural laws, and then expound 
the Vedas. This means that the Lord appears as Brahmaji, and then appears 
as Naradji to promote love and devotion in the world. The same Lord 
appears as Vyasji, to systematically promote Dharma, Artha*, Kama* and 
Moksha*. After that, He appears as Shukadevji, in order to manifest the 
verbal form of Divinity. The supreme Lord, who manifested as Brahma, 
Narada, Vyas, and as Shukadeva, has also manifested as the Bhagwat. The 
one Consciousness, the same Awareness, has many names. Narayana, 
Brahma, Narada, Shukadeva, and the Bhagwat. Vyasji found total peace 
after writing the Bhagwat. 

The Lord Narada told Vyasji, "You have written many scriptures 
interpreting the tendencies of human nature. You have written about the 
qualities of husbands and wives, kings and commoners, how people behave, 
the causes of friction, the sarcasm they show, and the way they resolve 
problems - all this has been described by you. However you have not 
described the Lord's greatness the way it should be described. 

Na tathaa vaasude \asya mahimaa hyanuvarnitah. 
Therefore, Vyasji, I suggest that you now remember Him. 

Samaadhinaanusmara tadviche ^shtitam. " 

Having said this, Naradaji began to narrate his own experiences. He said, "I 
had been born as the son of a maid servant, because I showed disrespect to 
sages." Naradaji was, earlier, a Gandharva*. Then he was born as the son of 
a maid servant, and after that he was born as the son of Brahmaji. The story 
of three births of Naradaji is given in the Bhagwat. 

Naradaji explained, "My mother used to work in the houses of the 
Brahmanas*, and sages would come there, to spend the four monsoon 



20 



months called the chatrumas*. I thus obtained the benefit of their company. 
An interest in spirituality awoke in me, and I began to sing hymns. I was 
granted a vision of the Lord. The Lord gave me this Veena*, and I went 
everywhere, singing His glories joyfully." 

Aho de\arshirdhanyoayam yatkeerti sharangadhanvanah, 
Gaayanmaadyannidam tantryaa ramayatyaaturam jagat. 1.6.39. 

Sutaji told Shaunaka and the other sages, that Naradaji is blessed. He goes 
around the universe, playing the Veena and singing the glories of the Lord, 
filling everyone with joy, wherever he goes. 

Naradaji is a sage of exceptional qualities. He narrates the Shrimad Bhagwat 
to Vyasji. Shaunaka and the other sages had heard the Bhagwat as a part of 
their duty, but Vyasji listens with the specific wish of benefiting mankind. 
Parikshit is a listener who is cleansed of all tendencies, is Nirguna*, and 
totally free of any worldly desire. Parikshit' s purity of heart is a part of his 
inheritance. A brief description of the Mahabharata war is given here, to 
clarify this fact. It is narrated how Ashwatthama beheaded the five little sons 
of Draupadi, towards the end of the war. What an extraordinarily piteous 
scene that was! Arjuna readied his chariot, Shri Krishna took the reins, and 
they brought back a defeated Ashwatthama. Just reflect upon what Draupadi 
said, when the murderer of her five sleeping sons was brought before her. 
Obtain a glimpse of the maternal love Draupadi 's heart was filled with. She 
said, 

Muchataam mucky ataame^ pa brahmano nitaraam guruh. 1.7.43. 



XX X 

Maa rodydasya jananee gautamee pati de\ataa. 1.7.47. 



21 



"Leave him! Let him go ! He is a Brahmin by birth. He is our Guru. If he is 
killed, his mother will weep, just as I weep today. I know the anguish a 
mother feels, when her children die. Let not Ashwatthama's mother go 
through this pain." 

Now, see the situation. Bhima urges that Ashwatthama should not be spared, 
and Draupadi pleads for his life. Yudhishthira and the other seniors support 
Draupadi. The Lord mediated and gave the solution. 

You know, don't you, how Draupadi is related to Parikshit? She is his 
paternal Grandmother. Parikshit is born into the family of this wonderful 
lady. 

Now, switch your attention to Parikshit' s mother, Uttara. When 
Ashwatthama released the Brahmastra* at her, she did not seek protection 
from Yudhishthira, Bhima, or Arjuna. She went to the Lord Shri Krishna. 
She prayed, "Lord, I do not fear death. I would accept death without any 
regrets, but the progeny of the lineage of Your devotees is in my womb. 
How will people feel any devotion for You, if he does not survive? Then the 
very tradition of devotion will disappear. Please, therefore, protect this 
unborn child, and protect the tradition of Bhakti." 

Shri Krishna thought, "So what if Parikshit doesn't ask for protection? His 
mother is asking for it. If I fail to protect him at such a time, then when will I 
protect him? I should first of all, enter Uttara' s womb, and I should keep - 
not one - but two weapons with Me, for Parikshit' s safety." 

Jugopa kukshingata aattachakro maatushcha me^n yah sharanam 
gataayaah. 10.1.6. 

The Lord was in such a hurry, He became so impatient, that He entered 
Uttara' s womb. He went to a place where God is not supposed to go, since 
God is not subject to birth or death the way humans are. He went into 
Uttara' s womb and protected Parikshit. This is the same Parikshit who was 
protected by the Lord. 

Now think of Subhadra, Parikshit 's paternal Grandmother. Abhimanyu was 
Subhadra's son, and Parikshit was Abhimanyu' s son. Subhadra said not a 
word to Shri Krishna when her son Abhimanyu was killed. Why was she 
silent? She thought, "Shri Krishna is my brother. He is the Lord incarnate. 
He is aware of everything. He can see the events that happen before Him. 
Then, where is the need for me to say anything?" Subhadra's devotion is of 
the silent kind, and Parikshit is her grandson. 



22 



Parikshit's Great-grandmother, Kunti, is a devotee beyond compare. If you 
so desire, you can undertake a research upon the topic, but nobody else in 
the world has asked for such a boon. The boon Kunti asks for is: 

Vipadah santu nah shashvattatra tattra jagadguro, 

Bhavato darshanam yatsyaadapunarbhavadarshanam. 1.8.25. 

"Oh, God! Let crisis occur repeatedly in my life, because I see You 
whenever I face a crisis. You came when the Pandavas were banished into 
the forests. You came when Draupadi was on the verge of being stripped 
naked. You came when Bhimasena was poisoned. You came when we were 
in danger of being burnt in a house of wax. Thus, every time we faced 
danger, You came to protect us, and the crisis turned into a great good 
fortune and joy for us." 

So, Parikshit is born into a family which has ladies as devoted as Kunti, 
Subhadra, Draupadi and Uttara. If we cast an eye over his forefathers, we 
realize what great devotees they, too, were. What an amazing death the 
Patriarch, Bhishma had! How highly Yudhishthira respected Shri Krishna! 
How deeply Arjuna loved Him! How much faith Bhimasena had on Shri 
Krishna! How highly Nakula and Sahadeva revered Him! The whole clan of 
the Pandavas was fully devoted to the Lord. Parikshit was born into such a 
family that he had a vision of the Lord while still in the womb! 
On the one hand, Parikshit is in the prime of life. He is the Monarch of the 
seven continents of the earth. Powerful demigods come to offer gifts at his 
feet. On the other hand, Shukadevaji Maharaj does not go to the house of 
any family man. He goes only when the cows are being milked. He waits 
until the householder finished milking the cow, drinks the milk, and departs. 
Shukadevaji is immensely detached from all worldly considerations. He 
possesses supreme knowledge, and meditates deeply. He is the best among 
Monks, and Parikshit is the best among devotees. These two are the ones 
who speak of, and listen to, the Bhagwat. 

The Shrimad Bhagwat can be read as a Yagya, or for the benefit of people, 
or for developing detachment, or to liberate us from the cycles of birth and 
death. The Lord took into consideration the fact that it was not a sword 
which threatened Parikshit, and nor was it an arrow. "Had Parikshit been 
threatened by a weapon," thought the Lord, "I would have come with My 
Gada* and Chakra* to protect him. However, when words are being used to 



23 



kill Parikshit, when he is being killed by a curse, then the Gada and Chakra, 
and even the Brahmastra are of no use. A verbal weapon must be countered 
by a verbal defense." This is why the Lord Shri Krishna manifested Himself 
as the Shrimad Bhagwat, to save Parikshit from the curse. 
If you hear the description of King Parikshit 's wealth and power, you will 
understand what great capacity he possessed. This indicates the range of 
competence and powers a person can attain, when graced by the Lord. King 
Parikshit traveled all over the seven continents, examining the face of 
everyone he encountered, wondering, "Is this person the Lord who protected 
me when I was in my mother's womb?" Parikshit' s aspiration was so pure 
that he sought only the One who had entered his mother's womb to protect 
him. His acid test was for the Divine. 

People in this world defeat their enemies, defeat other kingdoms. Parikshit, 
however, defeated Kaliyuga*. "Kaliyuga" is another name for "kaal"*. It is 
not an ordinary achievement to conquer Time (or death). When Parikshit 
conquered Kaliyuga, he went on to conquer other lands. Wherever he went, 
he heard about the greatness of Shri Krishna. People would say, "This is the 
same Parikshit who was saved by Shri Krishna, while still in his mother's 
womb." "Oh! Parikshit's father was the son of Shri Krishna's sister 
Subhadra." "Oh, Shri Krishna was always at hand to help his forefathers - 
Parikshit is blessed, indeed!" 

My brother, you may or may not like what I say, but no other religious sect 
in the world has such a God! Who else has a God who lived thus, among 
those who loved Him and were devoted to Him? He sat as a commoner, at 
the court of Yudhishthira. He followed, when Yudhishthira walked ahead. 
He consented to become the Royal messenger, at Yudhishthira' s request. 
When He came from Dwarka, He would bow down, not only to 
Yudhishthira, but also to Bhimasena. In the Shrimad Bhagwat there is a 
description of Shri Krishna guarding the Pandavas, while they slept. Where 
else has God accepted such a commoner's status? No other religious sect 
permits that for ordinary people, the Lord permeates every aspect of their 
daily life, and they can savor the sweetness of His presence in this manner. 
Our God is so compassionate that He does not separate Himself from us, no 
matter what condition we may be in. 

So, wherever he went, Parikshit would hear the qualities of the Lord 
extolled. He would be moved to tears, to think that the Lord drove his 
grandfather's chariot. Is it at all normal that the Lord sits as a mere servant 
obeying Arjuna's commands? "My Grandfather, Arjuna, told the Lord where 
he wanted to be driven, and the Lord obeyed!" Parikshit would be overcome 



24 



with emotion with such thoughts. Tears would glisten in his eyes, his skin 
would tingle, and his heart would overflow with love. 

Gaining victories, and moving ahead in this manner, Parikshit reached a spot 
where a cow and a bull were having a conversation. We all hear the sounds 
made by cattle, but Parikshit had the ability to understand what they were 
saying. He understood that the cow was actually Mother Earth, and the bull 
was Dharma, with three of his legs broken. 

You see, the Earth upon who we live, is periodically happy and unhappy. 
The Earth is happy when people lead righteous lives. This can happen only 
when people control their sense organs - stop the eyes from straying, control 
the hand when it has an urge to do something wrong, not allow the feet to go 
where they shouldn't, and prevent the tongue from saying what should not 
be spoken. Dharma is the ability to control our lifestyle. Dharma means 
'dhriti' - "W 'dhrityaa yayaa dharayate\ Dhriti stops a person 
from going on the wrong path. We may go where we please, provided we 
have control over our organs, speech, and mind. Nobody can predict where 
we'll end up, if there is no self control, righteousness, and the determination 
to prevent our inclinations from leading us to our doom. 
The Earth is sad, when those who live on her lack discipline and 
righteousness, and when they lead immoral lives. The mother of sorrow is 
indiscipline and immorality. To eat, drink, say or do whatever we feel like, 
can never bring happiness. Can you trust your mind to the extent of 
considering every random desire as a righteous one? No, my brother, even 
the mind requires control and discipline. Our sense organs must function 
within the limits of morality. This morality, this control, and this discipline 
is called Dharma. 

Where this Dharma becomes weak, sorrows spread all over the world. 
Parikshit saw that three of the bull's legs were broken, he had only one good 
leg, and he was very weak. When he heard the conversation between the 
cow and the bull, Parikshit began to think about what should be done. A 
little further, Parikshit saw a man, dressed like a King, wearing a crown, 
beautiful garments and ornaments. The man had a sword in his hand, and 
was beating the bull, destroying Dharma. Lifting his weapons, Parikshit 
challenged the man, asking how he dared to strike this bull - Dharma - in his 
kingdom. "Don't you know that I am from the clan of the Pandavas, 
protected by Shri Krishna?" Asked Parikshit. 'I will slay you." 
Hearing these words, the man threw off his crown and fell at the feet of 
Parikshit, like an ordinary commoner. Parikshit relented, "All right, since 
you have surrendered, I will not kill you." 



25 



This man was Kali. Kali means 'kalaha' - lack of goodwill; quarreling. 
Kalaha between father and son, between the Guru and disciple, between 
brothers, between husband and wife. This is called 'Kali Kaal'*. Parikshit 
conquered Kali, which means that he conquered the era which lacked 
goodwill, and said to him, "I banish you from my Kingdom." 
Kali said, "Your Majesty, I accept your verdict, but your reign extends over 
the entire world. Where am I to go?" 

"Go where the drunkards stay, where there is gambling, violence, and 
adultery," ordered Parikshit. 

"Your Highness," said Kali, "none of these vices exist in your Kingdom." 
Then Parikshit ordered Kali to go and stay where there is gold and great 
wealth. "These are causes for vanity, so go and live amongst them," ordered 
Parikshit. Kali accepted his command. 

So, Parikshit's power was such that he subjugated even the Kaliyuga, and 
the seven continents were under his reign. There was no dearth of wealth, or 
righteousness in Parikshit's life. He could do whatever he wanted to, and yet 
he abandoned everything to listen to the Bhagwat. His capacity to give up 
everything worldly was indeed astounding. 

The Shrimad Bhagwat clarifies that whoever desires their overall well-being, 
must first understand the four Purusharthas*. These are Dharma, Artha, 
Kama and Moksha. Fulfillment is thus divided into four areas. Examine why 
Dharma is needed in your life. Dharma is needed for you to be independent 
- don't depend upon anyone, become self-reliant. Total freedom from any 
kind of slavery is an indication of the presence of Dharma in your life. What 
are the factors which block our freedom? We are dependent upon sense 
objects, we are enslaved by our sense organs, our mind controls us, our 
urges force us, our ego drives us, and we are led astray by faulty 
understanding. Mukti* is a state when we are free from all these, and 
serenely established within our own Self, ^ii^n WT wr "Swatantryam 
paramam padam" - independence gives us the 'param pada'*. You must 
attain the param pada. All the good we do, is with the goal of being free 
from all types of bonds and slavery. 

If you practice Dharma to obtain wealth, that is no benefit - that is a 
bondage. If you want to know what the fruit of wealth is, the answer is that 
Dharma is the fruit of wealth, «nf i wfei srH^t "Dhanaat 
dharmam ", "dharmasya dharmaarthasya, dharmaikaantasya. " If you have 
wealth, use it in ways which will benefit others and you will get salvation. 
Your life will be filled with pious activities. The real fruit of wealth is 
Dharma, not bhog*. The fruit of Dharma is Moksha, not wealth. Then what 
is the fruit of bhog? The fruit of bhog is to sustain life. Eat and drink to be 



26 



healthy and sustain life. All worldly items are meant to help us live healthy 
lives, and avoid indulging in our desires, because there is no end to desire. 

Kaamasya ne ^ndriyapreetirlaabho jeeve ^ta yaavataa. 

We should, therefore, indulge ourselves only to the extent of remaining 
healthy. Take note of this once again: the purpose of Dharma is Moksha, not 
wealth. Wealth is to be used for Dharma, not bhog. And, the purpose of 
bhog is to maintain good health, not overindulgence. 
Now, if you ask what life is for, the answer is: 

Jeevasya tatvajigyaasaa naartho yashche ^ha karmabhih. 

The purpose of life is not to work endlessly. The greatest achievement is to 
know the ultimate Truth. Knowledge of the Truth is the real fruit of life. 
Unless you have knowledge about the Truth, you will not even know 
whether what you say, is true or false. It is like the blind leading the blind, 
when you talk without actually knowing what the Truth is. Do you really 
know whether the things you do are punya* or paapa*? You cannot 
discriminate accurately between punya and paapa, unless you have 
understood the truth of the matter. In the same way, you need to have 
knowledge about the ultimate Truth, to actually know the truth about 
heaven, about the Self, and about God. It is only when we begin to speak 
with honesty, that we begin to lead a life of truth, live righteously; and only 
then will we attain the ultimate Truth. We are only groping in the dark 
unless we attain this knowledge. That is why it is so important that we lead 
truthful, righteous lives. 

To blindly accept someone's statement about the ultimate Truth, is not right. 
Nothing becomes the truth just because someone has heard it from another, 
or believed it to be so. The Truth is that which is true in the eyes of God. 
The success of life is in getting a glimpse of that truth. To know what is right 
in the eyes of God, you must look deep into His eyes, meet his eyes. When 
your eyes show you what God sees as the Truth, you will understand the 
ultimate Truth. God is known as God because of His ability to see 
everything within Himself, by Himself, as Himself. When you develop the 
ability to see through His eyes, you will recognize the ultimate Truth. Until 
then, you wander in the darkness of ignorance. You will not really know 
whether your actions are in keeping with that truth, or not. You will not 



27 



know whether what you say, is in keeping with that truth. My dear, one 
cannot understand these subtle factors so easily. One has to try and grasp the 
purport of what the Mahatmas have indicated. 

Now, examine how the Bhagwat explains the Truth. It is analyzed in the 
very first chapter: 

softer tunic^d *PTo#rfci K.RXK 

Vadanti tattatvavidastattvam yajgnaamadvayam, 
Brahme 7z paramaatme 7z bhagavaaniti shabdyate \ 1.2.11. 

The great ones, who have realized the essence of the Truth, call it the 
'tattva'. Satya* is another name for tattva. The nature of the knowledge 
about the tattva is that the one who knows has no vanity about having this 
knowledge, and he does not see anything in the world as separate from God. 
The fact is that the Knower and that, which is known, are not separate. It is 
the same one Almighty Lord who appears as everything, as being beyond 
everything, as being the witness of everything, and is the substratum of all. 
There is nothing but Him. He is called the Brahman, the Paramatma, and 
Bhagvan*. Your life is a success if you have obtained knowledge about 
Him. This is the success of life. The Bhagwat tells us how we can achieve 
this success in our lives. 

-^m\: SI^TH^T o||^c|cb«j|<,fa: I 
WhH*cd<=WI few: WJ^cM^oPncTI I 
PSpirTt ^Wlt ^m\ : Tjn*ra<=|U|ob)d~H: I 

isRT^rr w^Tsnlw fera* ^oHdw i i 



% IJrkH W f^T JRfcfa I 



Shushrooshoh shraddadhaanasya vaasude \akathaaruchih, 




28 



Syaanmahatse\ayaa vipraah punyateerthanishe\anaat. 
Shrunvataam svakathaam krishnah punyashravanakeertanah, 
Hridyantahstho hyabhadraani vidyunoti suhritsataam. 
Nastapraaye ^shvabhadre ^shu nityam bhaagavatase \ayaa, 
Bhagavatyuttamashloke * bhaktirbhavati naishthikee. 
Tadaa rajastamobhaavaa kaamalobhaadayashcha ye \ 
Che^ta e^tairanaaviddham sthitam sattve^ praseedati. 
E\am prasannamanaso bhagavadbhaktiyogatah, 
Bhagavattattvavigyaanam muktasangasya jaayate \ 
Bhidyate^ hridayagranthishchidyante^ sarvasanshayaah, 
Ksheeyante^ chaasya karmaani drista e^tvaatmaneeshvare\ 1.2.16-21. 

"Go to a holy place. Obtain the company of the Mahatmas living there. 
Listen to them narrate the episodes of the Lord's Leela-katha. Have faith in 
it. When faith enters your heart, and the ears hear the discourses, then you 
develop a love for the Lord. After this, when your heart sings His glories, 
you become free of kama*, krodha*, lobha* etc. which propel you into 
wrongdoing. It is these negative tendencies which prevent us from seeing the 
Lord seated in our hearts. Kama shows woman or man who is not our 
spouse; lobha shows wealth, and krodha shows us the enemy. As a result we 
forget to see our Self, our God, and see only the outer world. 
The Bhagwat tells us that rajoguna* filled with kama, krodha, lobha, etc., 
and tamoguna* do not succeed in troubling our heart when Bhakti enters it. 
That is because our mind becomes established in satya. Our hearts become 
limpid and joyful with the Lord. Worldly troubles sully our hearts, but our 
heart is purified when we see the Lord in everyone and in everything. To 
have a pure heart is the paramount goal. When we view 'the other', he enters 
our heart with all his kama, krodha and lobha. But if we contemplate on the 
Lord - why, then - the Lord is already within us. We need not go anywhere 
to seek Him. 

Bhakti cleanses our heart. We cannot see the Lord unless our heart is pure. 
Our heart is filled with all types of knots, which are removed as we 
understand the essence of the Lord. The knots are the bonds of worldly 
attachment. We are free to meet people, and interact pleasantly with others, 
but we should take care not to form any worldly attachments, and should not 
consider one person to be a foe and another, a friend. In life, a foe becomes a 
friend and a friend becomes a foe. There is no such rule that a friend will 
remain a friend, or a foe will remain a foe. The only one to remain 
unchanged is God, so understand that He alone is your true friend. He is 
your all in all. 



29 



What is this knot of friend and foe? Just as cancer in the body is a physical 
lump, these mental knots of attachments and aversions are an equally 
frightening disease. These knots dissolve when we obtain a vision of the 
Lord. All the sorrows and joys resulting from past actions also fade away. 
Our doubts and perplexities scatter into oblivion. 

Hence, as we mentioned earlier, the Shrimad Bhagwat is an extraordinary 
work. It teaches you the methods for obtaining wealth, fulfilling desires, 
undertaking religious activities, as well as how to be free. It teaches you 
Bhakti, and tells you how you can meet God, how you can immerse yourself 
in Him. It gives the ultimate, the Pancham (fifth) Purushartha, Bhakti. 
Enough for today! Tomorrow we will try to view the Shrimad Bhagwat 
systematically, so that you can catch a glimpse of its greatness. 

Om Shanti Shanti Shanti. 



30 



BHAGWATAMRIT 



Pravarchan II 
(Skandha I & II & III) 

Yudhishthira was crowned King, after the Mahabharata war was won. He 
felt no joy, however, because his heart was overcome with grief. He 
reflected that temporal power is transient. The glory of victory was short- 
lived, but the massive massacre and damage to the world had sullied his 
heart. He felt that there was nothing he could do, to atone for this, and that 
he would never be free of the sin of having undertaken this war. 
Shri Krishna tried to relieve Yudhishthira of this dejection. He tried to 
counsel Yudhishthira, after Vyas failed to convince him, but Yudhishthira 
continued to feel oppressed by remorse. Shri Krishna then suggested that 
they visit Bhishmapitamah* who was lying on the bed of arrows. 
Note who the Lord gives importance to. Instead of taking the credit by 
dispelling Yudhishthira' s depression, He chose to give the credit to His 
devotee, and show the world how great His devotees are. That is why the 
Bhagwat is called the Bhagwat* Purana. 

Now, turn your attention to Bhishmapitamah, lying on his bed of arrows. 
None of the arrows had entered through his back, because he faced his 
enemies unflinchingly. The arrows pierced his body from the front and 
protruded from the back. Bhishmapitamah lay flat on his back, hanging in 
air, supported by the arrows whose tips were embedded in the ground. His 
contemplation upon Shri Krishna was unbroken, and because of this he felt 
no pain. 

You see, the Yogis learn the trick for avoiding the sensation of pain. The 
Vedantis* hold that despite of the experience of pain, the Knowledge (of the 
Supreme Reality), being transcendental, remains unaffected by all possible 
temporal experiences. The person whose heart is filled with loving thoughts 
of the Lord, however, never suffers. Pain can not abide where the 
contemplation is on the Lord. ^n^ihhc<j1tI^H<h1 I^ft 
"Yugapajgyanaanutpattirmanaso lingum" - the mind cannot hold two 
knowledges simultaneously. All sorrows are forgotten when we think of the 
Lord - ^ft^jrfcT: '*^fera%rfteFW "harismritihsarvavipadavimokshanam". 
However, we forget the Lord when we dwell upon our sorrow. 
So, Bhishmapitamah was lying on the bed of arrows. He could not rise to 
greet the Sages and the Lord Shri Krishna, so he welcomed them mentally, 



31 



and with great reverence. When Yudhishthira asked him about Dharma, he 
explained the subtleties of Dharma in detail, with a totally universal 
viewpoint. The Shanti Parva* and the Anushasan Parva* in the 
Mahabharata, are full of Bhishmapitamah's sermons. He describes the right 
and wrong for the Varna Dharma*, Ashrama Dharma*, Raj Dharma* and 
Grihastha Dharma*. Yudhishthira' s dilemma was resolved after he listened 
to these explanations. 

I wish to draw your attention to the unique message which the Bhagwat 
gives. Other religions do not have this unique clarification. In the Bhagwat, 
it is said: 

Vairagyaraagopaadhibhayaamaamnaatobhayalakshanaat 

This means that people attached to worldly matters should undertake 
worship through action, but a life of contemplation is better suited to those 
who are naturally detached. This shows that our religion is based on the 
natural mental tendencies of a person, and not upon the virtues of an object 
or action. Awareness is needed for righteousness; an inert object or an 
action, are not the main criteria. The dictates of Dharma may vary in 
accordance to the level of a person's awareness, in order to guide him 
towards emancipation and realization. 

Bhishmapitamah praised the Lord, and said, "You made me wait for so long, 
before coming to me! Now, You must stand before me, in Your four armed 
form, wearing Your golden colored garment and crown, and smiling Your 
bewitching smile, until my spirit leaves my body. You now have to wait 
until I have left this body of mine." 

W^sl^'ld *=bfafe*j H^d^fa ^Hcmc||£: 1 1 

Iti matirupakalpitaa vitrishnaa bhagavati saatvatapungave^ vibhumni, 
Svasukhamupagate^ kvachidvihartum prakritimupeyushi yadbhavapravaah. 
1.9.32. 

"Lord, I have obtained one thing in life. I have succeeded in emptying my 
mind of all desires. I have guarded my mind the way one protects one's 
daughter. Now, at the end of life, I give this mind - like one gives away a 
daughter - to You. I know fully well that You have no need for my mind, 



32 



but I implore You to accept and use it when You please, just as You accept 
Prakriti* to create the universe." 

Then Bhishmapitamah began to meditate upon the Lord. He also meditated 
upon the Gopis, upon the battlefield, and the dust from the horses' hooves 
which lay thick upon the Lord's hair. He meditated upon how Arjuna's 
confusion was dispelled, and how the Lord had rushed, with the wheel of the 
broken chariot, towards Bhishma, to kill him. 
Bhishmapitamah said: 

Svanigamamapahaaya matpratigyaamritamadhikartumavapluto rathasthah, 
Dhritarathacharanoabhyayaachchaladgurhaririva hantumimam 
gatottariyah. 1.9.37. 

"Lord, You could not bear to see Your beloved Arjuna unable to bear the 
brunt of my arrows. You decided, at that moment, to break Your own vow 
(to not fight), and honor my vow (to make You take up arms). You jumped 
down from the chariot, took up the wheel of a broken chariot lying there, 
and rushed to attack me with it. The Earth trembled at the sight. Your golden 
garment slipped off Your body, and You ran at me with all the ferocity of an 
attacking tiger!" 

Bhishmapitamah' s last meditation is even more remarkable. He says: 

Tamimahamajam shareerabhaajaam hridi hridi 

dhisthitamaatmakalpitaanaam, 

Pratidrishamiva naikadhaarkame^kam samadhigatoasmi 

didhootabhe ^damohah. 1 . 9. 42. 

"Lord, I am aware that it is You, the unborn Paramatma, who is seated in, 
and fills the hearts of all. It is actually You, who becomes the different "I", 
"I" and "I" of different people. Just as it is one Sun, which shines in 
everybody's eyes, in the same way, it is only You who shines in every heart. 
There is no differentiation between the different creatures, the seemingly 
separate souls, and the objects in the world. I am becoming free of all 
illusion, and obtaining an understanding of Your greatness." 



33 



This is followed by a description, #^?T: 5 SRT STlTRcT 'sontah shvaasa 
uparamat', meaning that Bhishmapitamah's spirit did not need to leave his 
body. His breath remained where it was. The five elements of his body - 
fire, wind, space, earth and water - dissolved and disintegrated. His soul 
didn't have to travel to a different realm of existence. 

Dhritarashtra's mukti* is described as occurring in a similar manner. Taking 
the advice of Vidura, he had gone to Haridwar, and there he immersed the 
five elements of his body into the five elements of Nature. He then 
immersed the five elements into the Aham*, the Aham into the Mahat*, the 
Mahat into Prakriti, and Prakriti into the Paramatma. Vidura also attained 
mukti by a similar method. 

When Yudhishthira heard from Arjuna, upon his return from Dwarka, that 
Shri Krishna had departed from this world, he accepted 'veer sannyas'*, and 
went on to attain heaven. 

But Arjuna, who had heard the Gita, could contain neither his anguish, nor 
his tears. The Bhagwat describes this beautifully. It is said that the pain of 
separation was so acute, and Arjuna wept so profusely, that all worldly 
attachments and considerations were washed away. The Knowledge of the 
Gita, as told by Shri Krishna, shone in Arjuna' s heart again. It had, for some 
time, become dimmed because of Arjuna' s involvement in worldly 
activities, and the three gunas* which fluctuate in everybody. However, 
when the Bhakti of the Lord flowed into Arjuna' s heart, he became free of 
sorrow. He felt one with the Brahman, free of all dualities, immersed in 
Prakriti, free of the gunas, and liberated from the cycles of birth and death. 
This is how the Bhagwat describes it: 

dlHM^rd^]ui|Krd J lrolK^^: I I U<v3°-^ 
Geetam bhagavataa gnaanam yattat sangraamamoordhani, 
Kaalakarmatamoruddham punaradhyaagamad vibhuh. 
Vishoko brahmasampattyaa sanchinnadvaitasanshayah, 
Leenaprakritinairgunyaadalingatvaasambhavah. 1.15.30-31. 

This way, all Parikshit's forefathers obtained mukti. They were all Graced 
by the Lord; they were all His devotees. Their hearts and lives were filled 
with the Lord Shri Krishna. The truth of the matter is that worldliness 
vanishes when the Lord is present; and where the Lord is not present, there 
is rebirth and death, and there is a tussle between attachments and aversions. 
Attachment binds us with partiality, and aversion binds us with cruelty. So, 



34 



we need to meditate upon the lotus-feet of the Lord, in order to rid our hearts 
of the demons Madhu-Kaitabh. 

At the request of Kunti, Shri Krishna had stayed back at Hastinapur, before 
returning to Dwarka. At Dwarka, He met all the old and young who had 
gathered to welcome Him. He bowed down to some, touched the feet of 
some with reverence, shook hands and smiled at others, and chatted with a 
few. He comforted everybody and gave them all they needed. Only then did 
Shri Krishna enter the city of Dwarka. This is an example which shows the 
oneness He felt with everybody. 

The Lord Shri Krishna knew about Parikshit's birth and background in 
advance. He knew that Parikshit was to be cursed for insulting a Mahatma. 
That is why He protected the unborn Parikshit in Uttara's womb. 
The unborn Parikshit had not called out to Shri Krishna to protect him. It is 
the nature of the Lord to protect the helpless. To protect even those - like 
Parikshita, Kubja, Putana, and others - who had not strived to attain Him. 
His protection is always there for Mahatmas and for all those who worship 
Him. It would have been easy for the Lord to save Parikshit from the curse 
given by the Brahmin's son, but He wasn't thinking only about saving 
Parikshit. Shri Krishna wanted to save all His children, and so He 
manifested in the form of the Shrimad Bhagwat. 

Now, see the qualities of Shukadevaji Maharaj. He is blissfully immersed in 
love for the Lord, despite being #ftf%cTtsfo" parinishthitoapi nairgunye " 
- committed to remaining free of the three gunas. He comes from the clans 
of the worshippers of Shiva, as well as the worshippers of Vishnu. The 
Kaushitki Samhita contains a description of Shri Shankarji* narrating the 
Shrimad Bhagwat to Gauriji. The dead egg of a parrot, which lay close by, 
came alive with the sound of the words of the Shrimad Bhagwat. It was as 
though the mritsanjeevani vidya* had been used upon it. Thus, the Shrimad 
Bhagwat becomes a tantra* spoken by Shiva, a holy book of the Shaivas*, 
and Shri Shukadevaji Maharaj becomes its preacher. 

Apart from this, Shri Shukadevaji Maharaj remained in his mother's womb 
for several years, before taking birth. His devotion to the feet of the Lord 
was total and unbroken, even though he was blissfully established within his 
Self, and had no worldly attachments. It could be said that Shri Shukadevaji 
did not become a lover of the Lord, but the Lord loved Shukadevji, and 
appeared as Shukadevji, when King Parikshit was threatened with the deadly 
snake-bite, rrarocr^crR^rRT^': tattraabhavadbhavaan vyasaputrah. 
Nobody knew Shukadevaji before he appeared at Parikshit's gathering of 
sages. Immature youngsters would run after him, trying to tease him. They 
ran off, however, when they saw how highly the great men respected Shri 



35 



Shukadevji. 

Having welcomed Shri Shukadevaji, King Parikshit placed his questions 
before him. "Oh noblest of Munis, please enlighten me about the main duties 
of a person, during his life and at the time of death. What should he do, and 
what should he not do? What should he say and what should he not say? 
What should he think and what should he not think? Please Grace me by 
answering all my questions in detail." 

Now, the second Skandha begins with Shri Shukadevaji Maharaj's answer. 
He was pleased with the questions asked by King Parikshit. He said, 
"Parikshit, your questions are not only for yourself - they are for the benefit 
of all. 

Vareeyane^sha te^ prashnah krito lokahitam nripa. 2.1.1. 

You see, King, life is shortened with every passing moment. No one can 
depend upon the body. Still, it is given to us for a very short duration, and 
we must make the best use of it. All great people have emphasized upon the 
need to purify the mind. Even animals do not speak, do anything, or indulge 
themselves thoughtlessly. How can a person totally lacking in self control, 
be considered a human being? 

Parikshit, a man can attain great spiritual heights, even in a short time. This 
is why Mahatmas love to hear about the wonderful qualities of the Lord, 
even when their object of worship is the Nirguna* form of the Lord, and 
they are not bound by any religious norms. 

Life should be filled with a feeling of wholeness. Feelings of parichinnata* 
are not desirable, because separateness is an illusion. All the tenets of 
traditional sects and casts, involve outlooks of separation. Some get caught 
in family attachment, some in loyalty to the town, State, or nation. Man's 
viewpoint should be vast enough to include all humanity, all creatures, and 
the whole universe. Only the Lord is like this. Hence, the highest duty of a 
human being is to make the Lord our goal." 

Tasmaat sarvaatmanaa raajan harih sarvatra sarvadaa, 
Shrotavyah kiritiavyashcha smartavyo bhagavannrinaam. 2.2.36. 



36 



This indicates that if you wish to be totally free of fear, then listen to talks 
about the Lord who abides in all, sing His glories, and remember Him at all 
times. 

When we see something, but do not know what it is, the words enlighten us. 
It is the same with things which are far away in place or time. Therefore, 
nobody can know about God unless they hear about Him. We cannot know 
Him through our eyes or nose. Then, how can we know about God? Through 
our ears - when we hear about the experiences of the great souls, when we 
listen to the explanations of the Vedas and the Shrutis* - only then can we 
begin to know about the Lord. Shravan* is the main method to learn about 
the Lord. The Lord will not enter your heart unless and until you undertake 
shravan, manan*, and nididhyasan*. 

Ten chapters in the second Skandha give a detailed description about the 
Lord and the aspects and methods for reaching Him. You must listen to the 
Vedas, and other scriptures based on the philosophy of the Vedas. You must 
listen to descriptions about how the Lord behaved, when He descended on 
earth. Listen to the great souls describe all this, if possible. If not, find 
someone and tell him what you know about the Lord. Incase you can't find 
either, sing His glories out loud. And, if even that is not possible, just hum 
His name to yourself. You feel joyful when you remember the Lord, and 
then you stop depending upon any external factor to bring you happiness. 
It is not proper to think that you will be happy when you get a particular 
object, person or situation. The font of joy is in your heart. It will gush forth, 
if you begin to listen to, sing about, or remember the Lord. The Ganga of 
happiness flows in your heart; the ocean of bliss heaves in your heart, and 
springs of joy bubble in your heart. You do not experience them because you 
have blocked the source. To open this blockage, you need shravan, smaran*, 
and kirtan*. The Lord explains that this is the only way to reach Him. 
There are many aspects of shravan. One is to contemplate on the Lord, 
instead of any person. God can be seen in Prakriti. He gives us satya 
buddhi*. The ahankara* rises from satya buddhi, and the five tanmatras* 
arise from the ahankara, followed by panchabhoot*. Hundreds of thousands 
of universes are created from the five elements, containing hundreds of 
thousands of beings, humans, animals, birds, demigods, Brahma, Vishnu and 
Mahesh - all are individuals, no bigger than grains of dust in the front of the 
Lord. The entire universe - including our body - appears within the Lord 
and gets immersed in Him. When we think on these lines, we forget all 
thoughts of friend and foe. We forget "mine" and "thine", and begin to 
glimpse the essence of the Lord in everybody and everything. 



37 



Sa sarvadheevrittyanubhootasarva aatmaa yathaa svapnajane^kshitaikah. 
2.1.39. 

The world seen in our dreams appears and vanishes by itself, and within 
itself. In the same way, the world we see when awake, appears in the 
Paramatma, our Atman. There is none who is 'mine' or 'thine', or to be 
desired or rejected. We should meditate upon the Lord to purify our mind. 
The Shrimad Bhagwat tells us that we are free to meditate upon different 
demigods, for the fulfillment of our desires. What one desires may be 
achieved by this method. However, if you meditate upon the Lord, who is 
everything, you will attain God, who is the all in all. 

This perspective of the Bhagwat is unique. It is not the property of any 
single race or country. It is for all the children of the Lord. You will notice 
that even trees, birds, vines, rivers, and everything in the Bhagwat is a 
Bhakta. In the Bhagwat, the earth thrills, and lotuses blossom, and rivers 
stop flowing, because the whole world is enmeshed in love and devotion for 
the Lord. There is nothing that can be considered to be bad. Evil enters our 
heart and sullies it, whenever we see evil in anything. We should, instead, 
focus on the essence, and adopt the methods of anvay-vyatirek* to 
understand the fact that there is nothing but the Lord. He is birth, He is 
death, He is disease, and He is health. He is parting, He is meeting. He is all 
that is. Meditating in this way, the shravan will be established in your heart. 
Meditate upon the Lord even if your heart is filled with worldly desires. 

cft^T ^Rd4l'lH ^% ^4 WTI I R3.%o 

Akaamah sarvakaamo vaa mokshakaama udaaradhih, 

Teevre^na bhaktiyoge^na yaje^ta purusham par am. 2.3.10. 

Your heart must be filled with bhakti. It does not matter whether your heart 
is free of desires, or filled with them. The moment the Lord enters your 
heart, you will experience total fulfillment, and His self-effulgence will be 
revealed by itself. 

The worldly factors which appear to be very important are really not at all 
important. Only the Lord is important. Meditate upon His beauty - your 
mind will become pure. If you wish to attain krama mukti*, and go first to 
Brahmalok*, you can do so. If you wish to become a Bhakta in this life, you 
will obtain sadyo mukti*. The paths of both krama mukti and sadyo mukti 
are described in the Bhagwat. 



38 



Even those who go to Brahmalok experience sorrow. The reason is the 
people there can see the earth, and see how people on earth suffer due to 
greed, even though there is no such thing as sorrow in God's creation. 
People are deluded into thinking that they are unhappy. 

Yacch ittatodah kripayaan idamvidaam 

durantadukhaprabhaavanudarshanaat. 2.2.27. 

Worldly people are unhappy because they do not know the Truth, do not 
understand the Truth, and are caught in the wheel of worldly considerations. 

Shokasthaanasahasraani bhayasthaanashataani cha, 
Divase ^-divase " moodhamaavishanti na panditam. 
Mahabharat, Svargarohan Parva.5.61. 

It is a sign of foolishness - not wisdom - to fluctuate between fear and 
sorrow umpteen times a day. Fear and sorrow are routine visitors in this 
world. We shouldn't permit them to affect us. 

As mentioned earlier, when someone goes to Brahmalok, and sees the 
unhappy people on earth, he begins to feel that it was not right to seek only 
his own salvation. So, he returns to the earth and becomes one with it. He 
identifies with all the world's joys and sorrows. He identifies first with the 
inert elements - fire, wind, space and the entire Prakriti - and finally, with 
the Paramatma Himself. 

This is the method of the Shrimad Bhagwat. A devotee in the Bhagwat asked 
for a boon. 

"Lord, grant that I abide in everybody's heart." 

The Lord said, "I am already seated in the hearts of all. What will you do 
there?" 

"Lord, You merely witness the sorrows in people's hearts." 

The Lord said, "My dear, every individual experiences the joy and sorrow 

due to him. What work have you, there?" 

The devotee pleaded, "Lord, Your witnessing will not be disturbed by my 
presence. I want only that all the sorrows come to me, and the people 
experience only happiness. I am ready to accept all the suffering of all the 
creatures in the world. Let people's sorrows be granted to me, and let no 



39 



person have sorrow, and may all this be in You - 3RT:f^?fr 3" "RoR^HT: 
antahsthito ye " bhavantyadukhaah." 

The Lord laughed with joy to hear the words of His devotee. He thought to 
Himself, "How magnanimous My devotee is! He has feelings of such 
beauty!" This is the kind of feeling a Bhakta should have. No Bhakta should 
harbor feelings of differentiation or separateness. 

This is the way that the muktas and the Bhaktas are described in the 
Bhagwat. 

The first two chapters of the second Skandha describe the subject of dhyan*. 
The next two chapters describe the hriday prasad* , and the following six 
chapters are about the mind. Hriday prasad means a joyful mind which also 
has humility. A person whose life lacks humility is called an egoist, and his 
ego receives blow after blow. It is always the rigid, which breaks. The teeth 
break with age, but the tongue endures. The one who is soft and gentle is the 
one that endures, but those who are rigid and hard, are broken by repeated 
blows. 

So, all those who speak of, and hear the Bhagwat - like Suta-Shaunak, and 
Shukadeva-Parikshit - have humility and bhakti, and they praise the Lord. 
The one who sees the world becomes attached, the one who sees T becomes 
an egoist, but the one who sees God finds that his world and his T, simply 
evaporate. Don't think that the world means bricks and stones. The world is 
composed of T and 'mine', of mamata* and moha*. I did this, I did that, I 
obtained this pleasure, I suffered - all this is the world. 
So, the chain of joys and sorrows, and the snares of 'me' and 'mine', are all 
destroyed when we begin to love the Lord. Egoism comes to an end. You get 
attached when you see the world. Looking at yourself gives rise to vanity. 
When you contemplate on the Lord, this world and your ego will both 
appear to be a part of Him. 

This is why Sutaji and Shukadevaji first do the mangala charan*, and then 
describe the Lord. Shaunakji and Parikshit's questions are filled with love 
and devotion for the Lord. The Bhagwat' s descriptions of the Lord are 
unparalleled, not to be found elsewhere. Shri Shukadevaji Maharaj says: 

%^ W ^TTSFTTSRT: cTC^ TO: I I R.^XC 

Kirata-hoonandhra-pulinda-pulkasaa aabheerakankaa yavanaah 
khasaadayah, 

Ye^anye^ cha paapaa yadupaashrayaashrayaah shudhyanti tasmai 
prabhavishnave^ namah. 2.4.18. 



40 



Actually, the pure person is one whose very memory is enough to purify the 
impure, to uplift the fallen, to bring forward those who lag behind, and raise 
them to greater heights. By meditating upon the Lord, and by surrendering to 
Him, the Kirat*, Hoon*, Andhra*, Pulinda* and Pulkas - meaning butchers 
- all became purified. That is why Shri Shukadevaji Maharaj prostrates 
before the Lord and prays, "Lord, come, be seated upon my speech and 
make it beautiful - ^Tts^Tf^fte ^wh n cmil^ ^ solankrisheeshta bhagavaan 
vachaansi me" - Lord, my speech is like the Garuda, who carries You 
(through the ears) into the hearts of people." 

Sutaji has stated, with absolute clarity that our ears are the only opening for 
the Lord to enter through. Just as all the water bodies become lucid when 
autumn comes; our hearts are cleansed as soon as the Lord enters. 

«F#cT ^of ^#^R3T W ?K?T I I 

Pravishatah karnarandhre ^na svaanaam bhaavasaroruham, 
Dhunoti shamalam krishnam salilasya yathaa sharat. 2.8.5 

I give a fascinating example, in this context. A gentleman went to meet his 
friend. The door was locked from within. Troubled by a total lack of 
response to all his knocks and calls, he entered through an open window. His 
friend lay unconscious on the bed. The floor had not been swept for days. 
There was no food in the house. Hastily, he gave his friend a sponge, 
changed his clothes, arranged for medicine and food, and cleaned the house. 
His friend was restored to good health. 

"How did you come in?" asked the friend. "I had not informed you of my 
illness, nor sent any invitation." 

"I do not need any formal invitation from you," replied the gentleman 
affectionately. "I entered through the open window, when you didn't open 
the door." 

God behaves in a similar way. He slips in, like a masked man entering 
someone's house stealthily, coming into our hearts through the ears, and 
then he removes all our faults. 

For shravan* we need tattvagnan*. Secondly, we need niyama*, thirdly, we 
need a pure heart, and then we need to praise the Lord. We have to accept 
that there is none greater than Him, and meditate upon His greatness, sing 
His glories, and listen to discourses upon Him. All these activities help to 
purify our heart. 



41 



The fifth requirement for shravan is manan. Shravan is achieved only when 
we undertake manan with a heart which has been purified by meditating 
upon the essence of the Lord. 

Manan can be undertaken by two methods - through utpatti* and through 
upapatti*. With reference to utpatti, Naradji tells Brahmaji, "Father, as far as 
I can understand, you are the greatest in all creation. Then, who do you 
meditate upon? Is there someone who is even greater than you, for you to 
meditate upon?" 

Brahmaji smiled when he heard Naradji' s words. He said, "My son, you 
don't know it yet, but there is someone greater than me, greater than my 
creation, greater than all the millions of worlds in the universe, and greater 
even than Prakriti. We are born of That." 

Having said this, Brahmaji began to describe the chronological detail of 
utpatti. The Lord uses Maya - which is the illusion which makes worldly 
interaction possible - for creating this world. Maya projects the existence of 
something (the world), where nothing exists. It hides the existing Reality, 
from our understanding. It is like a conjuror, an illusionist. Maya causes the 
illusion of the world. 

But for Maya, it is not possible for Creation to be seen in the non-dual, 
eternal Self. However, devotional people hold that Maya is the Achintya 
Shakti (unthinkable power) of the Lord, while in the Vedantic viewpoint, it 
is purely an illusion, due to an identification of the Self with the body (non- 
self). To explain this logically, people say that Maya is adhyaropit* upon the 
Lord. However, whether you consider it adhyaropit, or the achintya Shakti, 
this world around us is nothing but the Maya of the Lord; it is His magic 
show. 

Birth is only for the anitya*. This world comes and goes. It dies, because it 
is born and is subject to change. The Soul, however, is nitya." 
Nobody in this world - however smart he may be - can claim to have 
experienced the lack of his own existence. There has never been, nor will 
there ever be, such a person. This is not a material science which may yield 
new discoveries in future. This belongs to the field of experience. It is an 
established fact that the experience, 'I do not exist' is impossible. Anything 
- even knowledge itself - is known only by the awareness of its existence. 
Even sleep, or samaadhi*, or pralay* can be known only if one is aware 
about what happens. So much so, that one has to be aware that he has 
forgotten something! 

Now, pay attention to this point - from where do the four directions - North, 
South, East and West - begin? Can you tell me what lies to the East of East, 
or the West of West? No one can say where the East and West end. Does 



42 



anyone know where up and down begin and end? The fact is that nobody 
knows the beginning or the end of North, South, East, West, up or down. 
Adhyatma*, however, has the answer. It says that North, South, East, West, 
up and down, all begin where your T is. If you try to seek it elsewhere, you 
will fail. You will only find agnan*, and you will drown in the darkness. So, 
you see, you need not go anywhere outside to locate the four directions, 
above or below, or their history - you will find it all where your T is. That 
is where the world begins and that is where eternity abides; and within your 
T abides the Paramatma, who is nothing but Knowledge itself. What need is 
there, then, for you to wander in the dark? 

If you ask, "How can the world be created by me? I am the sakshi*. I am 
knowledge. How can these create?" 

The answer is that the world is not made this way - it is created by Maya. 
For as long as you see the world, you will have to imagine its cause. 
A chronological description of how the world began is given in the Bhagwat, 
followed by a description of the birth of the Lord. Only the anitya can be 
born. The nitya and parichinna* soul unites with the transient, and the entire 
world - srishti - is avirbhoot* by Maya, upon the nitya, aparichinna Lord. 
The fifth, sixth and seventh chapters describe the birth of creation like this. 
The world, created first by Maya, then the individual soul's uniting with the 
everlasting, and finally the description of the descent of the Lord. 
After this, the next three chapters of the second skandha describe the 
upapatti aspect of the Lord. Mukti is another name for upappati. When we 
were small, we'd hear that Brahma arose form the naval of the Lord. We'd 
imagine that God would be having a naval like ours. We'd imagine Him 
sleeping somewhere, and then a lotus arising from His naval, and 
blossoming, and Brahma emerging from within the lotus. The purport of the 
Vedas, however, is that the entire space which envelopes all the planets, is 
God's naval - nabhi. Nabha means the space. Then, how vast would the 
Lord be, whose naval is the vast sky? A lotus - a flower-like formation in 
the space, and Brahmaji was created. But, not just one Brahma. There are 
millions of Brahma, Vishnu and Rudras, within the form of the Paramatma. 
Then, when one lotus bloomed in the naval of the infinite Narayana*, and 
Brahmaji appeared from within the flower, he tried to see the four directions. 
He acquired four heads. He began to think, "Nothing seems to exist, except 
me. Then, who is it, from whom I am created?" He tried to find out, but 
couldn't find the cause within himself, nor outside. Truly - how can anyone 
know how his father is born? Brahmaji tried very hard, but could discover 
nothing. 



43 



After a while, when Brahma became desperate to know who created him, he 
heard an akashvani* saying "Tapa, tapa, tapa." 'Ta' is the sixteenth and 'pa' 
is the twenty- first letter in the Sanskrit alphabet. Brahmaji heard these two 
syllables. He contemplated, and came to the conclusion that Narayana - the 
tattva which is all-pervading, which is the Paramatma - is nowhere else but 
here. Then, right there, he had a vision of the Lord. Pleased with Brahmaji, 
the Lord said, "Brahmaji, you have done a lot of tapa. You may ask for any 
boon." 

Note this, the Antahkaran* has four types of tendencies. If you wish to see 
the form of the Divine, you must first experience the inclinations of the 
mind. We set out to see the world outside, but we are not able to see what 
lies in our hearts! How can we recognize without, what we fail to recognize 
within? We are not aware of even our own self! 

Begin to recognize your self. The color of Brahmaji is red. Being the 
Creator, he has a predominance of 'raja'*. Creation, however, cannot be 
achieved without the requisite knowledge - gnan, so Brahmaji 's mount is a 
swan - hansa - symbolizing vivek*. His four mouths voice the four Vedas. 
The impulses of his Antahkaran are the sankalpa mana*, vikalpa chitta*, 
nityaroopa buddhi*, and the ahankaaroopa ahankar*. Brahmaji uses all these 
for creating the world. 

Pleased with Brahmaji, the Lord granted him His vision, and touched his 
hand - ^ kare " sprishan - Brahmaji bowed down to the Lord and said, 
"Lord, I desire to obtain the tattvavignaan*." At this, the Lord recited the 
Chatushloki Bhagwat*, giving the gist of the entire Bhagwat in just four 
verses. A pure mind is necessary to enter into the meaning of this precis, so 
Brahmaji undertook tapa, attained the vision of the Lord, and grasped the 
meaning of the Lord's 
words. 

I draw your attention to a straightforward formula. Try to match whatever 
you see, with the way the Lord would view it. Then try to gauge whether 
your viewpoint is right in the eyes of God. Think for a moment - is your 
viewpoint more authentic than God's? Our little human eyes cannot see 
beyond a furlong or two, cannot see the miniscule microbes. How can we 
trust them to show the actual, entire picture? Why doesn't it strike you that 
only the Lord can see the whole picture and know the true reality? 
Who has seen the beginning of That, which has no East- West, no North- 
South, no up or down, and no past or future? Who has seen the end of time? 
The present turns into the past, and the future turns into the present. As 
explained earlier, the end of time is where T is, and that is also where the 
Paramatma is. Had the Lord not been there, your intellect could never have 



44 



known the boundaries of time and space. You can only know the real nature 
of the world when you view it through the eyes of the Lord, and begin to 
identify with Him. At present, you consider someone as yours, and others as 
alien; some, your friends and some, your foes; some to be good and some to 
be bad. You will truly know the truth about the world when you see 
everything the way God sees it. The Lord says to Brahmaji: 

Ahame \aasame \aagre " naanyadyat sadasat par am, 
Paschaadaham yade ^tancha yoavashishye ^ta sosmyaham. 

"I existed before the world was created; only I exist, and only I will remain. 
Time is only an imagined factor within Me, caused by your identifying 
yourself with your body. I remain unchanging. There is nothing but Me - 
nothing gross, nothing subtle, nothing animate, nothing inanimate. It is all 
Me. I am before you, I am after you, and all you see is Me alone. I am the 
ultimate being. There is no other reality but My Self. 

It is Maya, who shows us things which don't exist, and hides what does exist 
- WMf ^tt cW: yathaabhaaso yathaa tamah. All these figures - the 
humans, animals, birds, trees, creepers - are made from the five elements. 
The earth contains water, water contains fire, fire contains wind, and the 
wind contains the space. When we are still, we sit unmoving within the sky. 
When we run, we cause the air to move, and the heat created in our body 
causes us to perspire, and the perspiration turns into earth when it dries. The 
entire universe appears within the five elements, and the larger beings are 
established in the smaller ones. The sky supports the wind, the wind 
supports the fire, and the fire supports brightness. In the same way, I 
permeate the entire creation, and nothing exists but Me." 

3^o4jrd}«M«iT ^n?T I I 

E^taavade\a jigyaasyam tatvajigyaasunaatmanah, 
Anvayavyatire ^kaabhyaam yat syaat sarvatra sarvadaa. 
2. 9.35. " 

Now, this is not about people who are interested only in worldly pleasures 
like food, and clothes, and status, and authority. Those who worry about the 
depletion of wealth, or health, or death, and are completely unconcerned 
about the ultimate Truth, are living the life of delusion. 



45 



We are talking about a jigyasu*, who desires to know what the ultimate 
Truth is. We are talking about one filled with agony, that despite having had 
a good life, and being intelligent, he has not discovered the Truth. For the 
sake of such idealistic persons, the Lord makes Brahmaji the medium, and 
said, "Know That, which exists at all times, in all places, and in every form. 
Know That, which enables you to know everything, and which is known 
even in the absence of everything. When you get this knowledge, you will 
see That is one with your Atman, and then and there you will realize the 
Truth." 

The Lord thus used the Chatushloki Bhagwat - making Brahmaji His 
instrument - to explain to all future aspirants about His endlessness, about 
the play of His Maya, about how Creation was made, and the ultimate 
Knowledge about the world and the people in it. 

There is also a Chatushloki Mahabharata*, just like the Chatushloki 
Bhagwat. It is called the Gayatri* or Savitri of the Mahabharata. It explains 
the purport of the Mahabharata as lucidly as the Chatushloki Bhagwat 
explains the Bhagwat. 

In the last tenth chapter of the second Skandha, Shri Shukadevji tells 
Parikshit that the Shrimad Bhagwat Mahapurana describes the Lord by 
raising ten points. What are they? One is, how was this world created? The 
second is, how were the different species made, when all creatures are 
formed out of the same tattva and the same panchabhhootas? The third point 
is, how is the world upheld, and where? The fourth question is, who 
provides the life sustaining water when the earth dries up? The fifth, what 
are the different desires which arise in people's minds? The sixth is, how is 
Time divided? The seventh is, what is the nature of the Bhaktas? The eighth 
is, how does one control the mind, to love the Lord? The ninth is, what is 
Mukti? And, the tenth is, what is the nature of That, which upholds all else? 
The Shrimad Bhagwat uses these ten questions, to explain the one tattva, the 
one Paramatma, in detail. 

So far, we have covered the first two Skandhas of the Bhagwat. The first 
Skandha describes the speakers and listeners of the Bhagwat - Suta- 
Shaunak; Narad-Vyas; Shukadevaji-Parikshit. The second Skandha 
established that Shravan is the most effective method to attain the Lord, and 
different aspects of Shravan are described. 

Now, listen to what the third Skandha has to say. It contains thirty three 
chapters, and describes the Lord through visarga*. Visarga means the variety 
in creation. The affect of the changing balances of the three gunas, within 
the light of the Brahman, causes all the variety seen in this world, and this is 
called Visarga. 



46 



The Bhagwat uses this word - visarga - in a unique way. In the Gita, you 
read about two types of bhootasargas*. One is the 'daiva sarga'* and the 
other is the 'asura sarga'*. 

Dvau bhootasargo loke^smin daiva aasura e\a cha. 

In the third Skandha, the first nineteen chapters describe the asura visarga, 
and the remaining fourteen chapters describe the daiva sarga. Within the 
demonic creation come Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakashipu, and in the Godly 
creation come the lineages of Manu-Shataroopa, Kardam-Devhuti, and 
Kashyap-Aditi. 

Now I will tell you a little about the background. The period is when the 
clans of the Kauravas and the Pandavas were preparing for the Mahabharata 
war. Dhritarashtra could not sleep at night, as he feared that both clans may 
be destroyed in the war. He summoned Vidura, and asked his advice about 
what should be done. 

Dhritarashtra' s name was most appropriate. He held on to temporal power 
with all his might. He had no thought for the Lord; all his thoughts were 
about the world around him. He was blind, in every sense of the word, 
because the Lord was nowhere, even in his mind's eye! He held on only to 
the earthly factors, so he was Dhritarashtra. 

On the other hand, Vidura was the personification of gnan. He was 
Dramaraj* incarnate. You must have heard of the incident, when the Lord 
Shri Krishna came to Hastinapur, as the emissary of the Pandavas. 
Duryodhan had prepared his own palace with lavish furnishings and kept 
expensive gifts - including jewels - ready, to welcome the Lord. He prayed 
to the Lord, to accept his hospitality and refresh Himself. 
The Lord Shri Krishna told Duryodhan, "I always go to the homes of those 
who offer food lovingly. If I am very hungry, I even go and ask people to 
give Me food. You, however, have no love for Me, and I have no appetite at 
present. So, I will neither go to your house, nor will I eat a meal with you." 

Sapreeti bhojyaanyanyaani aapadobhojyani va punah, 
Na cha tvam preeyase " rajan na chaivaapadgatohyaham. 
Mahabharata, 

Then the Lord Shri Krishna went, uninvited, to Vidura' s house. 



47 



Shri Shukadevji Maharaj told Parikshit, right at the beginning of the third 
Skandha of the Bhagwat, that the Lord considered Vidura's house His own. 
So, He rejected Duryodhan's invitation and went there instead. 

Paurave^ndragriham hitvaa pravive^shaatmasaatkritam. 3.1.2. 

It was the same Viduraji, who explained the principles of justice, truth and 
impartiality to Dhritarashtra, and rebuked him for the difference in his 
attitude towards the Pandavas and his own sons. "The Kaliyuga has entered 
your home, in the guise of Duryodhan," Vidura told Dhritarashtra. "He has 
come to destroy your clan." 

Duryodhan was furious when he heard of what Vidura had said about him, 
to his father. At this, Viduraji then left his bow and arrows at Dhritarashtra 's 
doorstep, to make it clear that he was not going to the Pandava's side, and 
left the city to go on a pilgrimage. After visiting a number of holy places, he 
reached the banks of the Yamuna, where he met Uddhavji. He enquired 
whether all was well at Dwarka. 

By then, the Lord Shri Krishna had departed from this world. Uddhavji was 
the only one to survive, in the clan of Yaduvanshis. When Viduraji asked 
about Shri Krishna, Uddhavji went into a trance. Tears flowed from his eyes 
and his body tingled with ecstasy and love for the Lord. 
You must have heard that Uddhavji used to worship Shri Krishna, when he 
was only five years old. When called for his meals, he would tell his mother 
that he would come when he had finished his puja. Now, that same Uddhavji 
was parted forever, from his beloved Shri Krishna. Uddhavji was wise and 
learned, and knew many secrets of the human mind. He also knew the 
essence of the Lord, and Vidura's question reminded him of Shri Krishna, 
and he was transported into an ecstatic trance. 

After a while, Uddhavji emerged form his trance and began to answer. He 
said, "Viduraji, neither Devaki-Vasudeva, nor Pradyumna-Aniruddha 
survived. The Lord's Maya ensures that whatever rises in this world has to 
descend. This is the pattern. And, whatever is gathered, gets scattered, and 
we have to part from those we meet. I came away, after seeing all this and 
hearing the Lord's sermon. I plan to walk along the banks of the Yamuna, up 
to the banks of the Ganga and then right up to Badrinath. I will stay there, 
worshipping the Lord, and do whatever He commands. These are His 
instructions to me, for the time being." 



48 



Viduraji requested him for the gnan he had received from Shri Krishna, in 
His last sermon. Uddhavji said, "Viduraji, the Lord remembered you, as He 
left the earth." 

Viduraji was overwhelmed to hear this. He felt deeply grateful for this 
Grace, of being remembered by the Lord, at the time of His departure. 
Uddhavji said, "Viduraji, the Lord Shri Krishna has instructed that you are 
to go and meet Maitreyaji. Meitreyaji and I had listened together, when the 
Lord spoke His last words. Having said everything He wanted to tell us, the 
Lord told Maitreyaji to give this Gnan to you, when he meets you." 
Then Viduraji went to the banks of the Ganga. Parikshit asked Shri 
Shukadevji, "Sir, how is it that Uddhavji escaped the mass destruction of the 
Yaduvanshis*? Even the Lord, who manipulates the strings of Maya (who 
uses the three gunas to make the whole world dance), left His form and left 
for the realm where He abides." 

"Parikshit", replied Shri Shukadevji, "After accomplishing His designated 
task of 'using a thorn to remove a thorn' the Lord decided that the time had 
come for Him to give up His Yaduvanshi body. He was thinking about how 
best to retain the Knowledge for posterity, and remembered Uddhavji. He 
said, 

"Noddhavonvapi mannyoono yadgunairnaarditah prabhuh". 3.4.31 

Worldly temptations overcome everybody, and crush every noble instinct. 
Chetan* is crushed under worldly considerations. Think for yourself - when 
you sit on a chair, is it you who is seated on the chair, or is the chair actually 
sitting on you? Introspection will reveal that it is the chair (position) which 
rules your mind and heart, even though your body is seated upon the chair. 
That is why you cannot overcome worldly considerations. They overcome 
your judgment, your higher self. 

That is why Shri Krishna thought, "Uddhavji is absolutely like Me in every 
way. He never allowed worldly considerations to conquer his better self. He 
is best suited to meditate upon Me and contain My knowledge. He should, 
therefore, remain in this world when I depart." 

The third chapter of the third Skandh of the Bhagwat describes how Shri 
Krishna had become emotionally detached from the golden city of Dwarka, 
from all its luxuries and riches, and even from His Queens - who were the 
personification of perfection. Uddhavji speaks of this: 

cR^ci <HH|U|^| <H'c|oH< J |U|H ^FTI 



49 



Tasyaivam ramamaanasya samvatsaraganaan bahoon, 
Grihame^dhe^shu yoge^shu viraagah samajaayata.3.3.22. 

What was the reason for the Lord's detachment? His wives had begun to 
quarrel amongst themselves. Even Balaramaji had begun to disagree with 
Him. His children and grandchildren were undisciplined and disobedient. 
They would eat, drink, and do everything Shri Krishna disapproved of. They 
would quarrel amongst themselves. They had become so out of hand that 
they would even threaten Shri Krishna physically. 

Shri Krishna reflected that He had shown the world His love, and it was time 
to show the world His detachment. God's life contains everything - 
attachment-detachment, righteousness-unrighteousness, knowledge- 
nescience, and also joy and sorrow. So, He revealed His detachment and 
bestowed the Knowledge upon Uddhavji, and departed from the world. 
Bidding farewell to Uddhavji, Viduraji went down the banks of the Ganga. 
He met Maitreyaji, who is described as ^^Hi^HH'iiq^Fr 
'maitreyamaaseenamagaadhabodham', the personification of boundless 
knowledge. Viduraji imbued the goodness of Maitreyaji, and asked, 
"Revered Sir, people work in order to be happy - <j<sin °h<llci 
sukhaaya karmaani karoti lokah - everybody desires happiness. But, what is 
the nature of happiness?" 

Here, we have to consider what happiness actually is. For how long do you 
desire happiness? You will say, "I want to be happy all the time." If you 
wish to remain happy all the time, you have to seek it in something which is 
always there. How can you have it permanently, if you seek it in something 
which is perishable? 

Now, ponder upon this question - which are the places you wish to be happy 
in? "I want to be happy everywhere", is what you will naturally say. Well, 
you can only find happiness everywhere, if you seek it in something which 
is prevalent everywhere. If that which makes you happy, exists in just a few 
places, how can you be happy everywhere? 

If you desire happiness from everything, you have to seek that, which is in 
everything. How can you get happiness from everything if it is only in a few 
objects? 

If you desire to obtain happiness effortlessly, why do you not seek it from 
that, which is seated in your own heart? If you desire happiness without 
bondage, seek it in that, which is ever free. In the same way, you can have 
the awareness of feeling blissfully happy only if you seek it in that which is 
Bliss Incarnate. 



50 



What I mean to say is that the happiness which you can get everywhere, at 
all times, from everybody, effortlessly, without bondage, and being 
delightfully aware that you are happy, is not available anywhere else, but in 
the Lord. 

That is why Viduraji spoke about this to Maytreyaji, pointing out that the 
things people do to obtain happiness, brings them only unhappiness. Far 
from obtaining happiness, they do not even manage to get rid of their 
sorrows. "Revered Sir, please explain the reason for this contradiction. If the 
Lord Himself, is everything, why is life filled with sorrow and bondage? 
How is it possible that the individual soul is not separate from the Lord, and 
yet he suffers, gets bound, considering himself to be mortal?" asked 
Viduraji. 

Maitreyaji replied, "Viduraji, this is all due to the Lord's Maya: 

Se yam bhagavato maayaa yanna ye ^na virudhyate \ 3. 7.9. 

We experience sorrow where it does not exist. The Self, which is Bliss 
Incarnate, is totally unknown to us. Thus we are wandering in the dark, 
unaware of the Self-effulgent Atman. The Lord's Maya is such that it cannot 
be proved by logic. Whatever is proved by logic is natural, and therefore it 
cannot be termed as Maya. Even the scientific world is not Maya. Maya is 
defined as something which appears, but cannot be proved." 
Maitreyaji also said: 

^?T: ^HW^u|KKrcKiKHI^clKrd<lcHd^ I I 3.Vs.^X 

Ashe ^shasankle ^shashamam vidhatte " gunaanuvaadashravanam murare \ 
Kutah punas taccharanaaravindaparaagase \aaratiraatmalabdhaa. 3.7.14. 

"Come, Vidura, sit beside me. I will speak, and you listen, about the Lord. 
All your remaining doubts will be removed when you begin to enjoy 
discourses upon Him. Shravan is the only way out of our problems." 
Now, the time is up, for today. Tomorrow, I will give you a brief outline of 
the dialogue between Vidura and Maitreya. You will also be told about how 
Shesha Bhagwan* speaks about the Lord, how the Lord descended as the 
Varaha Avatar* and how He killed Hiranyaksha. The episode of Kapil- 
Devahuti will also be covered tomorrow. 

Om Shantih Shantih Shantih. 



51 



BHAGWATAMRIT 



Pravarchan III. 

(Skandha III & IV) 

On the one hand, the Suta-Shaunak talks continue in Naimisharanya*, and 
on the other hand, two dialogues are taking place on the banks of the Ganga. 
One is between Shukadev and Parikshit, and the other is between Vidura and 
Maitreya. When different sages say the same thing again and again, at 
different times and in different places, it is an indication of the authenticity 
and importance of the subject under discussion. The great thinkers give 
particular importance to something repeated by a sage. 
When Maitreyaji started talking about the Lord, he began by giving the 
lineage of his Gurus. He spoke of how this lineage begins with the Shesha*, 
who survives when the world is dissolved. He explained that the Knowledge 
handed down, was given originally by the four Sanatkumars, Sankhyayana, 
and Vrihaspati. 

New knowledge reveals new facts, but when it comes to the one, indivisible, 
eternal Truth, then it is that one, indivisible, eternal Truth alone, which is the 
Ultimate Gnan. As far as scientific discoveries go, it is always the latest 
discovery which is accepted as valid. Even in medical sciences, it is always 
the latest drugs which are considered the best. However, when it comes to 
the eternal Truth, and the question is raised about what is the eternal, 
endless, unchanging, unbiased, and ultimate Truth, then that Truth is 
considered authentic, which is free of any changeable or limited background 
of any individual. 

If you were to argue, that since God made everything, He must also have 
made Gnan, then that is not a valid argument. Was there no knowledge 
before Gnan (knowledge) was made? It is not so. Gnan is not made; neither 
by God, nor by a human. We connect the beginning and end of objects of 
desire, and superimpose the same assumption upon Gnan. Then we say that 
there must be a point when Gnan began. Such thinking apart, Gnan has no 
beginning. 

When did Time begin? Did it begin in Time, or outside of Time? When did 
space begin? In space, or beyond space? The fact is that where eternal 
factors are concerned, the only foundation for their knowledge are the 
Vedas. The Vedas are free of the differences of the knower and the known. 
They are pure, impersonal knowledge. They are anaadi* and anant*. 



52 



Maitreyaji described the lineage of his knowledge, and told Viduraji, "The 
Sanakadi sages went to Bhagwan Sakarshan*, who has the supreme 
knowledge about everything. At that time, the Lord Sankarshan was residing 
in the Patala loka*. The sages asked him to grace them with the knowledge 
of the Param* Purushottama* Brahman. The Lord Shesha told them that 
when the world was immersed in the waters of potential causality, a lotus 
grew from the naval of the Lord Narayana (who reclines on the coiled form 
of the thousand headed serpent, Shesha), and Brahmaji emerged from within 
the lotus flower. 

Udaaplutam vishvamidam tadaaseed yannidrayaameelitadrinyameelayat, 
Aheendratalpe^adhishayaana e^kah kritakshanah svaatmaratau nireehah. 
3.8.10. 

You see, there are three eons, namely the Brahma Kalpa*, the Padma Kalpa* 
and the Varaha Kalpa*. These are all different periods in Time. Sometimes 
the Earth was created from the thigh of the Lord, and sometimes form His 
feet. It emerges from the ocean, or even manifests on its own, at the will of 
the Paramatama. This is how the different Puranas describe the birth of the 
Earth. 

It was in the Padma Kalpa, that Brahmaji emerged from the lotus in the 
Lord's naval. His body split into two portions, when he decided to create the 
world. Brahmaji's body is not gross, like ours. The whole subtle world is the 
body of Brahmaji. Hence, of the two parts of his body, one became 
Swayambhuva*, the son of Swayambhu*, and the other part became 
Shatroopa. Shatroopa was Brahmaji's feminine aspect, containing Shakti, 
the beauty of shraddha*, extreme sweetness, and extreme tenderness. The 
first half, which became Manu, was male. These two were tied in wedlock 
and became husband and wife. 

Manu and Shatroopa folded their hands and asked Brahmaji what he wanted 
them to do. This pleased Brahmaji, because a father is always pleased when 
his children desire to know and do their duties. 

So, the delighted Brahmaji told Manu and Shatroopa that he wanted them to 
have many children, and increase the population of the world. Manu agreed, 
but pointed out that they needed a place where they could stay and have 
children. Brahmaji realized the validity of the problem, and began to think 
how best it may be solved. 



53 



Now, you have to consider how the Earth was created. As mentioned earlier, 
the Upanishads say that the Earth emerged from water - 

Adbhyah prithivee. 

The Earth is also described as emerging from Brahma: 

E^tasmaajjaayate^ praano manah sarve^ndriy acini cha, 
Kham vaayurjyotiraapah prithivee vishvasya dhaarinee. 
Mundakopanishad. 

Thus, the Earth is described as emerging from water, and also from the Lord. 
On this occasion, however, the Earth is shown to be submerged in water, and 
Brahmaji began to think about how it could be made to emerge. He 
wondered where the dharinee* Shakti of the Earth had gone. 
The Earth has supporting power. Water has the power to satisfy. The power 
of fire is brightness. The wind has the power of movement, and the space 
has the power to permeate. These are the powers of the Atman. That is why 
it is said, that creation begins where "I" is. It was mentioned earlier, that the 
North, South, east, West, up and down, all the directions are manifested 
where the "I" is. That is why we must investigate the "I", when we wish to 
seek God. 

So, when Brahmaji wished to know how to manifest the dharinee Shakti of 
the Prithivi*, he meditated upon the Lord. Just then, a tiny Varaha emerged 
from his nostrils. If you pay attention, you will realize that the Earth's 
predominant quality is fragrance. According to the philosophical schools of 
Nyaya Vaisheshik and Yoga Sankhya, fragrance emits from a tanmaatra*, 
and is known by the organ of smell. The Prithivi becomes the adhibhoota*, 
the nose becomes the adhyatma*, and the Paramatma emerged as the 
adhidaiva* Varaha. The Varaha form is also called the Yagya* form of the 
Lord, because Yagya abides in every follicle of the Varaha' s body. 
Even today, we can see how much the pigs love the earth. They eat even the 
filthiest parts with relish. They delight in rolling in the mud. They thrust 
their snout into the slush, and bring lumps of mud out of the water. What is 
Yagya? Yagya is when actions are undertaken for the benefit of all. What 
greater Yagya can there be, than devouring the unclean, and cleansing the 
earth? Then, when the adhidaiva Shakti of the Lord emerged as Varaha, 



54 



from the nostrils of Brahmaji, it started to grow rapidly. In a little while, the 
mammoth form of the Varaha entered the ocean. When the Varaha shook 
Himself, His hairs created gigantic waves which reached the elevated 
realms, and the sages there bathed themselves in these waves, and were 
purified. 

Brahmaji began to praise the Lord Varaha. The Lord Varaha went straight to 
the spot where the Earth lay submerged. He raised the Earth on His snout. 
This symbolizes that the Lord gives prime importance to the Earth. Then, He 
emerged from the waters, and placed the Earth securely, so that Manu and 
Shatroopa could live upon it, and procreate, as commanded by Brahmaji. 
These are not mere mythological tales. These stories contain scientific facts, 
which cannot be elaborated upon, due to time constraints. 
It was in this context that Viduraji placed his questions to Maitreyaji. "Sir, I 
have heard that when the Lord Varaha came to save the Earth, He met the 
first demon, Hiranyaksha, and killed him after a fierce battle. Since you are 
telling me about how the Earth was uplifted, I pray you tell me in detail, 
about how Hiranyaksha tried to hinder the Lord, and how the Lord killed 
him." 

Brahmaji had just started to create, and Manu- Shatroopa had just been 
manifested from his body, and no one else had yet been born. Then, from 
where did Hiranyaksha appear, to battle with Lord Varaha? Hiranyaksha was 
the son of Diti and the sage Kashyap, and there was a large population in 
existence, when he and his brother Hiranyakashipu were born. Then, how 
did he come onto the scene when Brahmaji was yet to create the world? 
The answer, given in the Puranas, is worth listening to. Hiranyaksha and 
Hiranyakashipu were not born in that Kalpa. They were creatures of the 
Padma Kalpa, in which an age ends with the end of every day of Brahma's 
life. Destruction is not total, in the end of those ages. During the partial 
pralay*, Kashyap and his wife Aditi go to heaven, while Diti goes to Patal*, 
and the two demon sons of Diti remain in the deluge of destruction, to 
practice asceticism. At that point of time, they consider themselves to be the 
Monarchs of the waters. Hence, when the Lord Varaha went to rise up the 
Earth, Hiranyaksha blocked His path, claiming that the Earth belonged to 
him. 

The second question which crops up is, from where did Hiranyaksha and 
Hiranyakashipu obtain such wealth, strength and powers? The answer is yet 
another Leela of the Lord. Remember that Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakashipu 
had fallen from Vaikunth, at the curse of the Sanatkumars. These are 
amongst those who are born enlightened, and do not need a Guru. The 
Sanakadis had not obtained tattvagnan from any Guru. 



55 



The message given in this episode is that the Earth is upheld by the Lord's 
power, and not by the power of any action. The Lord is sarva samartha*. If 
the Lord lacked the power to release people from bondage, and bind those 
who are liberated; or create something where there is nothing, then His 
power for achieving everything would not be revealed. So, the Lord showed 
that the liberated Jay-Vijay of Vaikunth could, at His wish, be sent to the 
Earth. Not only were they sent down, they were born as Asuras*.They were 
bound (by birth) even though they had achieved liberation. Then, the Lord 
liberated them again. 

The entire responsibility and power of the world is, thus, upon the Lord. The 
enormous powers and long life of even those who fall from Vaikunth, is 
worth noting. The extent of their wealth and glory are such that even 
Brahma and other demigods are induced to bow before them. They are not 
affected by Time. It needs - not even their own - just a wish of their people, 
for rivers of milk to start flowing, and precious gems to emerge, and cause 
great sages to sing their praises, and make the sky wondrously beautiful to 
behold. 

When we consider the extent of wealth and power which those dispelled 
from Vaikunth possess, we can imagine the amount of power, wealth, luxury 
and comfort of those living in Vaikunth. 

So, when Viduraji asked about where Hiranyaksha came from, and the 
reason the Lord decided to kill him, Maitreyaji began to narrate the whole 
background. He said, "The Sanakadi sages, prompted by the wish of the 
Lord, went to Vaikunth to meet Him." 

Now, the Sanakadis are the best among sages, and live close to the land of 
the Lord. It is easy for them to meditate upon the Lord, since they know His 
essence. They never have any desire to go physically to Vaikunth to see the 
Lord. They never feel that He is somewhere else, far away, and not with 
them. They do not feel that He is only in a particular form or in a particular 
point in Time. This is why they seldom go to Vaikunth, even though they 
live so close to it, and possess the power to go anywhere in creation. 
The Sanakadis went to Vaikunth because they were in tune with the Lord, 
and understood that He wished to carry out a particular Leela. The Lord was 
reclining upon His Shesha Shaiya*, which endures even during the 
dissolution of Creation, and is the softest bed imaginable! The Lord has the 
milky ocean, He has the gorgeous jewel, kaustuvmani upon His chest, the 
goddess Laxmi is with Him, and with Him rests the power to sustain the 
entire creation. 

One day, the Lord felt an impulse to take a trip out of Vaikunth. He felt like 
exercising His four arms with some work. 



56 



Jay-Vijay are the gatekeepers of the Lord. They symbolize indriya jaya* and 
mano vijay*. They had the capacity to control their mind and body. A 
simultaneous desire arose in them, to have some play with the Lord. 
It so happened, that Laxmiji had, one day, gone out of Vaikunth. The beauty 
of Vaikunth defies description. Laxmiji saw walls studded with precious 
gems, and crystals so clear that it was like seeing one's reflection in a pool 
of clear water. When Laxmiji returned, Jay-Vijay asked her to wait awhile, 
since the Lord was in yoga nidra*. 

This annoyed Laxmiji. She felt insulted that she, being the mistress of the 
house, was made to wait outside, by the gate keepers, who were, after all, 
her servants! She complained to the Lord, telling Him how His gatekeepers 
had stopped her from entering His chamber. 

The Lord told her to forbear a little. He pointed out that it would not be 
seemly if He banished them at her instigation. People would accuse Him of 
being ruled by His wife. "I will banish Jay-Vijay the day they insult a sage," 
He promised. Laxmiji was calmed by these words, because she always obeys 
the Lord. 

The Sanatkumars came soon after this incident, and were stopped by Jay- 
Vijay. As mentioned earlier, both are liberated souls, with full Knowledge. 
They knew the Sanakadis perfectly well. At that moment, however, the Lord 
caused them to consider the sages to be mere children. 
So, Jay-Vijay blocked the Sanakadis' path. It was God's design that the 
Sanakadis came, and His gate keepers blocked their path. It was God's 
design that He permitted anger to rise even in Vaikunth, because everything 
there is pure and perfect. The Lord creates His abode by that which is Sad*, 
His devotees by that which is Chid*, so that they can savor His sweetness, 
and Rasa* to create His own form. The Lord's form is rasamaya*. Those 
who thirst for it are chinmaya*, and His eternal land is sanmaya*. There is 
no question of anger entering there. Anger comes to those whose hearts 
burn. It is the child of hatred. Anger wells up when we hate someone, and 
burns up the heart of the one who harbors anger, just as fire burns up the 
wood which houses it. 

The Bhagwat calls anger 'Kamanuja*', just as Laxman is called 
'Ramanuja*'. Anger follows desire, just like Laxman follows Rama! So, the 
Sanakadis were overcome by Kamanuja when Jay-Vijay misbehaved with 
them. Their eyes reddened a little, and they said, "The whole creation exists 
in the stomach of the Lord; its existence is caused by His wish. How can 
there be such differentiation in His land? Udarbhedi bhayam - 

worldly people differentiate because of their stomach, resulting in much 
damage. Selfishness is the only reason for this. You are not fit to be in 



57 



Vaikunth, when you behave like those people. You deserve to be in the body 
of an Asura." An Asura is the person who fails to understand the working of 
his Antahkaran, one who gets engrossed in attaining the sensual pleasures of 
the material world. 

Asushu praane ^shu indriye ^shu ramante " iti asuraah. 

So, the Sanakadis said, "Go to where sensuous people live. You can 
differentiate to your heart's content there. You can satiate your desires and 
be as angry and greedy as you wish." 

Now, give a thought to Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakashipu. They are rich by 
virtue of their greed. %tM 3#T"ft ^R^" Hiranye^ akshinee yasye^ - 
Hiranyaksha means 'the one whose eyes are fixed on gold.' And, 
=hfei^4-eH hiranyam kashipuryasya - Hiranyakashipu means 'the one who 
sleeps on a bed of gold.' Greed was the predominant fault in these two 
demons. Desire was predominant in Ravana, and anger was predominant in 
Shishupal. Thus, the attendants of the Lord identified with demonic 
tendencies. 

The Lord came to the Sanakadi sages. He welcomed them with all 
reverence, and said, "The curse you have given to these two, is most 
appropriate." 

Just see how tactful the Lord is. People should never side with their servants 
on such occasions. They should first pacify the enraged guests. 
So, the Lord Narayana said, "Despite being My attendants, these two do not 
understand My priorities. They go against My wishes, when they show 
disrespect to the Mahatmas. That is why it is proper for you to curse them. 
Respected Sirs, I consider the Mahatmas My all-in-all. If the Mahatmas did 
not speak about My virtues, Laxmi would not accept Me. Neither would I be 
living in Vaikunth, and nor would anyone know Me to be God. It is through 
your mouths that I eat, and you are the foundation for My existence. 

Shchindyaam svabaahumapi vah pratikoolavrittim. 
3.16.6. 

I can even cut off My arms, if they do anything against you. Of what 
importance are these attendants? They should now go to Earth, as you have 



58 



said, and go through the curse given by you, and then return quickly to 
Vaikunth. It is My principle, with regard to those who serve Me, that I 
consider their mistake to be Mine. Therefore, they will descend three times 
to Earth, as demons, and I will follow them four times, for their salvation. I 
will take on the form of Varaha for Hiranyaksha, the form of Narasimha* for 
Hiranyakashipu, the form of Rama for Ravana, and the form of Krishna for 
Shishupal. I will go four times for their salvation, and bring them back to 
My abode." 

The story about how Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakashipu were born to 
Kashyap and Diti is most instructive. Kashyapji is also a form of the Lord. 
The Nirukta* analyzes the meaning of kashyap thus: ^WT: wnw ? 
kashyapah kasmaat? - why is Kashyap called Kashyap? w\: "q^rfcT, H*q=h 
=h^nl *Tc|frT Yatah pashyati pashyaka e \a kashyapo bhavati - the one who 
makes no differentiation in the way he views people with godly or demonic 
traits. Kashyap treats both his wives, Diti and Aditi, alike. Diti means 'the 
one who divides' and Aditi means 'the one who unifies.' Both are wives of 
Kashyapji, meaning that both are tendencies which work in the mind, and 
are fostered by the individual. Both become pregnant (bear fruit) and bring 
forth children (results). 

One evening, when the sage Kashyap was seated in deep meditation, lust 
arose in the mind of Diti. She went to Kashyapji and demanded conjugal 
satisfaction. The scriptures are severely critical of women who get carried 
away by passion. fa^> ?rt ^TT WW 'Dhik taam yaa yaachate ' svayam ' - 
shame on the woman who appeals to a man for physical satisfaction. It is 
considered contemptible, even in the Kamashastras*. 

Kashyap told Diti to wait a while, because of five factors which made her 
demands unsuitable for fulfillment. "One reason is that I am, at present, 
seated for meditation. Secondly, conjugal acts are forbidden at evening. 
Thirdly, the Lord Rudra* moves about with his followers during this time of 
the day. The fourth reason is that at this moment, you are overcome by lust. 
The fifth reason is that I am disinclined. Under the circumstances, it is most 
inappropriate to accept your demand." 

Diti, however, paid no heed to what Kashyapji said. She continued to force 
herself shamelessly on him. Then Kashyapji bowed to the Lord, considering 
it to be His wish. Jay-Vijay, fallen from Vaikunth, entered Diti's womb. 
Now, observe the fact that it is only women who can have children. 
Although physically different, men and women are made of the same five 
elements. Still, only the women have the ability to bear a fetus and provide 
nourishment to the unborn baby in her womb. Men lack this power. So, even 



59 



though men and women have equal rights in society, one has the ability to 

impregnate and the other has the ability to become pregnant. 

According to the scientific descriptions in our scriptures, a woman is 

influenced more by the lunar power and a man by solar power. A child is 

born by the unification of both the solar and the lunar influences. The raja* 

is affected by the moon, and the veerya* is affected by the sun. Thus, the 

softness in the baby comes from the mother, while the hardness (bones, etc) 

come from the father. This is what our scriptures have stated. 

The world was besieged with all kinds of trouble, when Jay-Vijay entered 

Diti's womb. The Devtas were terrified, and rushed to Brahmaji. Brahmaji 

told them how Jay and Vijay had entered Diti's womb, due to a curse. 

Vishvasya yah sthitilayodbhavahe ^turaadyo 
Yoge ^shvarairapi duratyayayogamaayah, 
Kshe ^mam vidhaasyati sa no bhagavaanstrayadheesha 
Statraasamadeeyavimrishe ^na kriyaanihaarthah. 
3.16.37. 

"Remember, Devtas, He who is the cause of the Creation, Sustenance and 
Destruction sees everything; so, have no fear. He will do everything that is 
good. The Lord rules Maya. He makes her dance like a deer, with all her 
three Gunas. That Lord will do everything for our wellbeing. Why should 
we worry? Everything will turn out for the best." 

Reassured by these words, the Devtas returned to their abode. Hiranyaksha 
and Hiranyakashipu were born when the time was right. Hiranyaksha 
continued to practice tapasya* even during the pralay, and when he realized 
- in the next, Varaha Kalpa - that the Lord was coming to rescue the Earth, 
he rushed to challenge Him. 

The battle between Hiranyaksha and the Lord was long and fierce. It 
continued for about one day of Brahmaji, which is a very, very long time. 
This made Brahmaji nervous, and he prayed to the Lord to kill Hiranyaksha 
quickly. The Lord tore open Hiranyaksha' s stomach, and at once a flame 
merged, and prepared to turn into Ravana. This is because the Lord had 
desired that he be born thrice, as he wished the curse of the Brahmins to be 
fulfilled. 



60 



Thus, when the Lord killed Hiranyaksha and established the Earth, Brahmaji 
was happy that a place was now available for people to live upon. Then 
Manuji and Shatroopa came to Brahmaji. Brahmaji blessed them and told 
them to create a large population, and rule with kindness. 
Brahmaji had many other sons, but he wanted the population to grow, as 
there were very few people. People began to live on the Earth, and the world 
grew. The description of how Brahmaji created the world may be read in the 
original Bhagwat. 

It is astonishing to read of the different causes given for the creation of the 
world. At times, the Lord, Himself, becomes the world. At times it is created 
by the five elements. Sometimes, by Brahmaji; sometimes it is created step 
by step, and sometimes without any calculable order. One cannot pinpoint 
the exact cause by latching on to any particular theory of creation. One has 
to consider the differences of Time, place, items, and the one who creates. 
The Brahmavids* are the only ones who truly know the causes of creation. It 
is not possible to obtain this knowledge by sitting in a library to study the 
Puranas and other texts. These episodes are at three different levels - 
adhyatmik*, adhidaivik*, and adhibhautik*. 

Manu and Shutroopa had nine daughters, one of which was Devhuti*. The 
one who has the capacity to call the Lord is called Devhuti. When the mind 
is naturally inclined towards the Lord, it causes Him to be drawn to the 
devotee, and this inclination is called Devhuti. 

Devhuti was married to Kardam Rishi*, who was born enriched with 
tattvagnan*. When Kardamji undertook austerities to attain the Lord, 
Brahmaji told him to get married and have children. Kardamji reflected that 
it is best to develop strength through austerities, before embarking upon 
marriage and procreation. 

Just think about how much importance people used to pay to 
brahmacharya*. The seed of those who lack self control and austerity is 
weakened, resulting in the birth of a weak person. 

So, Kardamji decided to practice asceticism and develop strength. He 
undertook worship at a place called Siddhapur, in Gujarat. Pleased by his 
worship, the Lord Vishnu appeared, seated upon His eagle, Garuda. 
Kardamji eulogized Him, and the Lord blessed Kardamji, and granted him a 
boon. 

Do you know why the Lord uses Garuda as His mount? It is because the 
Garuda is the personification of a word picture; he is the personification of 
the Sama Veda. The words of the Sama Veda are heard, when he flaps his 
wings. The Lord bestows a glimpse of Himself, by appearing seated upon 
the words, of which the Garuda is a personification. How can the Lord be 



61 



seen by those who have no mantra*, who do no japa*, and who lack the 
appropriate words? Words are His vehicle, because they bring the Lord to 
us. 

The Lord Vishnu said, "Kardamji, I am aware of the reason for your tapasya. 
I have already made all suitable arrangements. Swayambhuva Manu and his 
wife Shatroopa will come to you, the day after tomorrow. They will bring 
their daughter, Devhuti, and ask you to accept her hand in marriage. So, stay 
here, and await their arrival." Having said this, the Lord disappeared. 
Swayambhuva Manu, his wife Shatroopa and daughter, Devhuti, came on a 
chariot, on the third day. Kardamji welcomed them, and asked, "Sir, I hope 
your people live happily under your rule? The only King fit to rule is the one 
whose people are well looked after and content. No King is a true King, if he 
causes sorrow for his people. Please tell me whether the arrangements for 
water are satisfactory there? I hope good food is available for all? I hope that 
all are content and have no cause for fear?" 

Swayambhuva Manu replied, "Maharaj,you have, in the guise of asking 
about the well-being of my people, given guidance about the duties of a 
King. I have but one anxiety, that my daughter should get married to a man 
of excellence. I have heard that you are prepared to accept marriage. That is 
why my wife and I have brought our daughter to you. Please accept her as 
your wife. We have brought exactly what you desire, so please do not 
disagree." 

Udyatasya hi kaamasya prativaado na shakyate \ 

Kardamji replied, "Maharaj, who is it, who will fail to respect your 
daughter? She is so beautiful, so intelligent, and so full of virtues and 
wisdom that even the Gandharva* Vishwavasu fell off his plane because he 
was so enthralled when he saw her." 

Devhuti blushed to hear Kardamji' s praises, because she was a mature 
woman. As I have pointed out repeatedly, not a single lady in the Shrimad 
Bhagwat has been married at an early age, or without full knowledge of 
what was happening. In all the marriages described, the brides were already 
in love with the grooms. Even in the abductions, the brides are youthful, but 
not immature or unwilling. 

So, Kardamji accepted Swayambhuva Manu's proposal, and married 
Devhuti. After the wedding, Swayambhuva Manu and Shatroopa returned to 
their kingdom, and Devhuti stayed back with Kardamji. Kardamji had no 
cottage and no kitchen. He lived under a tree. Despite this, Devhuti - the 



62 



daughter of an Emperor - began to serve him. She was as devoted as the 
legendary wife, Savitri. 

When it is possible for us to worship the Lord in a statue made by a man, 
why can't we see and worship the Lord in a man, made by the Lord? What 
can stop us from getting the rewards of ritual worship, whether the Lord is 
worshipped in the form of a statue or in the form of a human? Unselfish 
service always brings benefits like control over sense organs, a purified 
mind, and merit equal to that of a great ascetic. Failure is caused by lack of 
faith. The mind and desires are restless, as it is. They become more so, when 
lack of faith adds to the restlessness, and prevents them from settling down 
anywhere. 

Devhuti had tremendous faith in Kardamji's strength. She was engrossed in 
attending to his every need. Kardamji was satisfied with her loving service - 
cl^TfaRWcTtwr 'te jeeyaansamatoshayat '. 

You see, faith abides where purity exists. Confidence abides where faith 
exists. Complete confidence in each other creates true love, and with it, the 
desire develops, to bring comfort and pleasure to the loved one. In such 
idyllic conditions, it matters little whether material comforts like food and 
clothes are available or not. 

One day, Kardamji felt very happy and said, "Devi*, you served me without 
bothering about your body, sense organs, or mind. Your service has been 
dedicated and unselfish. So, you should also get the same fruit of my 
austerities as I get, and go to the same land (after death) as I. Now, tell me 
what is in your mind, and what your desire is." 

Devhuti spoke shyly, "Sir, the purpose of marriage is unification - ^If^WTt 
"^pirT ' sakridangasango bhooyat'. So, I should be given the good fortune to 
be loved as your wife, fully, just once - #HH^<ni % ^ioch 'priye ^shu 
saubhaagyafalaa hi chaarutaa '. If this body of mine is used by you, and 
serves to give pleasure, then my birth, beauty, and life will be successful and 
fulfilled." 

Kardamji accepted Devhuti 's plea without hesitation. Then he saw that she 
did not seem very happy, so he made an aircraft. Those who give discourses 
upon the Puranas, speak at length about this wonderful airship. They 
describe how many rooms it had, how many levels, what the rooms were 
like, what luxuries it contained, etc. When the aircraft was ready, Devhuti 
bathed in its pool of elixir, and a number of handmaidens appeared, to serve 
her. Then Kardamji bathed in it. Both acquired a divine beauty, and began to 
tour the universe in this aircraft. 



63 



You see, tapasya is something which brings results, without any doubt. At 
first, there may be many hardships, but the results are always sweet - ^t?T: 
^F^T % ^H-kdi ferarr 'kle^shah fale^na hi punarnavataam vidhatte^'. When a 
person endures discomfort, he obtains new benefits. T Ttet^w: fepr: 
'Peedodbhavaah siddhayah' - the successful person is he who tolerates 
discomfort. 

Now, Kardamji and Devhuti went around the universe like celestial beings. 
Then he used his powers, and extended himself to create nine daughters. All 
of them were married to great sages. 

After this, Kardamji told Devhuti, "Devi, now you have obtained your 
heart's desire. Give me leave to go and practice asceticism. My inclinations 
are not for physical pleasures. The desire for pleasures can never be satiated. 
The more we get, the more we want, ^ferw f^w^r ^cnfqcr^ 'Havishaa 
krishnavartme \a bhooya e \aabhivardhate ' ' there is no end to thirst. That 
is why I will now go for tapasya." 

Devhuti replied, "Swami*, you have got our daughters married. It would be 
nice if I had a son. You had accepted to be with me until I got a son. The 
Lord has granted you the boon that He will be born as your son. So, please 
stay with me a little longer." 

Kardamji agreed, realizing that the Lord was soon to appear in Devhuti 's 
womb, and be born as Kapildev. 

People debate whether the Atman is sakar* or nirakar*. Some are convinced 
that it is nirakar. It is, however, the same Atman which connects itself to our 
desires, and enters our body, and takes birth. It has Avidya attached to it. 
That is why its actions are propelled by desires, and this results in its being 
born in different forms. The Lord is everywhere, even though He is 
formless. He is, moreover, all-powerful, and He is in all forms, and chooses 
to become sakar, using His own power of Maya. The Lord is not the 
fragment of some human's imagination; nor is He a human being with 
exceptional qualities. The Lord descends and manifests in different forms, as 
an Avatar. 

Neither the Jains, nor the Buddhists believe in the Avatar of the Lord. Since 
they do not believe in God, how can they believe that God takes on an 
Avatar? Their belief says that the individual soul is uplifted, as it becomes 
pure. All the Buddhas, Jins, Parasnaths, Mahaviras, are purified souls of 
human beings. Our Vedic scriptures, however, accept the existence of God, 
and say that His mercy indices Him to descend, and save the people on 
Earth. 



64 



You see, the Kriya Yoga* was predominant in the Varaha Avatar. The Earth 
is sanmayi*, and stays in an inanimate form. So, it is uplifted by the Varaha 
form of the Lord; and His action is Yagya pradhan*. Action is required for 
any kind of progress. 

The Kapil Avatar*, however, is gnan pradhan. A predominance of 
knowledge is used, to rend asunder the Avidya granthi*, and liberate the 
people of the world. Kapildevji is the Gnan Avatar of the Lord. You will 
notice a spectacular fact about Him, which astounds even those who believe 
in the sakar. 

Brahmaji came to eulogize the Lord, when He was born as Kapildev. Then 
Kardamji came, and bowed down to his son, saying, "Lord, I had prayed 
only for You to come as my son, and You granted me this boon. Now that 
you have come, I will go and live in seclusion, to meditate until I have 
obtained the realization that my true Self is the Brahman. The entire creation 
we see is nothing but a mental projection. It appears to be real, just as a 
piece of rope appears to be a real snake. I wish to meditate upon my Self, 
and obtain Brahmagnan*, until I attain the stage when the world no longer 
seems real. Please stay here, and liberate your mother." 
Such is the greatness of Mahatmas! This is real vairagya! This is true 
renunciation, and this is true aloofness. The Lord, Himself, has come as 
Kardamji 's son, but Kardamji does His parikrama*, and establishes his mind 
in the Self, and goes off to wander in absolute freedom. 
Then Devhuti said to Kapildev, "So much of my life has passed in vain 
if^TT^RT^ 'indreeyarthaprasange^na' indulging my sense organs, in 
sensual objects. You are the Lord, and have manifested as my son. Please 
advise me regarding the Vidya* which quietens Avidya*. The Atman is 
actually, and in essence, the Paramatma, just as a pot is actually, and in 
essence, the clay of which it is made. It may be called by different names, 
but the item is not separate from the matter it is made of. The names given 
are imagined in the minds of people." 

Do you consider yourself to be a vessel, or do you consider yourself to be 
the clay? If you consider yourself the vessel, then you have had a birth, 
which may even have a black smudge upon it; it may break. It may be filled 
either with water, or with wine, or with water of the Ganga. However, if you 
do not accept the deha buddhi*, but accept, instead, the mritika buddhi*, 
then you will be free of all dualities. There will be no question of your being 
filled with water, wine, or Ganga water; nor of any sin and merit; nor of 
attachment and aversion; nor of joy and sorrow. It is clay, whether it is held 
together in the shape of a pot, or smashed into pieces. There is, actually, 
only clay. 



65 



That is why Devhuti prayed to Lord Kapildev, for tattvagnan. Kapil 
Bhagawan said, "You see, Mother, 

CAe "ta/z khalvasya bandhaaya muktaye " chaatmano matam. 

There is no bondage, nor liberation, in the essence of the Atman. The 
impression that we are bound is caused by Avidya. It is because we do not 
know our real Self that we feel we are individual entities, and are bound. As 
soon as the illusion of being separate is dispelled from our conscious mind, 
we realize that we are already free. 

Gune ^shu saktam bandhaaya ratam vaa punsi muktaye \ 

If you are attached to anything in the world, you are bound; and if this 
attachment is severed, you are free." 

Kapildevji gave many examples to explain this principle. This dialogue 
between the Lord and Devhuti is the essence of the Sankhya philosophy. In 
His talk, Kapildevji explained the division of Prakriti-Purusha*, saying that 
that which is seen, is Prakriti, and the one who sees, is the Atman. That, 
which is seen, has three portions. One is the karya*, and the other is the 
karan*. The karan is that which is not caused by any external factor. This is 
Prakriti. 

Karya is that which has no other effect. That is panchabhoota, which has no 
further effect. The trees, animals, birds, humans etc, are not made by 
panchabhoota, they are the panchabhoota. The ultimate effect we see are the 
earth, water, fire, wind, and space. All the form seen within these, are 
imagined. 

So, even in the Sankhya philosophy, the humans, animals, birds, etc. are all 
imagined within the five elements - they have no reality. Where is space 
split up? Where is the wind divided? How can fire be differentiated? Where 
is water separated? Where is the earth fragmented? The wind in the bodies is 
one. So are the space, heat, moisture and solid contents. There is no essential 
difference in all the different bodies in the world. 

This is why the panchabhootas are called the karya, and Prakriti is called the 
karan (since it is not caused by any external factor). Now, the stages in 
between the karya (of the panchabhoota) and the karan (of Prakriti) is called 
the karya-karan. Viewed from the angle of the five elements, it is the karan 



66 



(cause), and viewed from the angle of Prakriti, it is the karya (effect). So, the 
visible has three levels - karya, karan, and a mixture of both, karya-karan. 
The detached Atman is totally a drashtaa*. The changes in Prakriti, or in any 
condition, or factor, do not affect the Atman in any way. It is not easy to 
become oblivious of the Prakriti. One needs to practice intense yogic 
meditation to achieve this. Bhakti is the best alternative for those who cannot 
undertake meditation. Kapildevji meditated upon the nature of the Lord, and 
then spoke about Bhakti. 

Jyaaye ^cchiram bhagavatashcharanaaravindam. 

One should contemplate on the Lord, moving from the feet to the face, and 
from the face to the beautiful feet of the Lord, and dwell upon His 
shrivigraha*. Let the mind revel in the beauty of the Lord. The mind strays, 
anyway! Instead of allowing it to roam outside, use dharna yoga* to bring it 
back repeatedly, to the lovely form of the Lord. Let it admire with increasing 
love, the lotus-like face of the Lord, His beautiful crown and earrings, His 
broad forehead and gracious eyebrows, the eyes filled with love, the 
beautifully molded nose, lips, and His enchanting smile. Focus on the 
pitamber*, on His broad chest, the armbands on His arms, and the bracelets 
on His wrists. Focus on the multicolored garland, His anklets and the lotus- 
like feet, with the high toenails. Let your mind's eye travel from tip to toe, 
thinking repeatedly, about how enchanting His form and apparel are. 
Ultimately focus upon the *jl*Hci *n^Rp- 'susmitam bhaavayanmukham ' - 
beautiful, smiling countenance. 

Meditating in this manner helps to overcome the mind's wayward 
tendencies. When the mind is completely focused at one point, it is not 
possible to see the entire form of the Lord. If you see the eyes as clearly as 
the nose, it means that your mind is not fully focused. 

Muktaashrayam yarhi nirvishayam viraktam, 
Nirvaanamricchati manah sahasaa yathaarchih. 

The object of desire is not seen when the aham* - which is the foundation of 
the mind - disappears. The mind quietens when there is no attachment or 
aversion in it, just as a flame dies down when there is no oil in the lamp. All 
the natural inclinations of the mind - like restlessness and waywardness - 



67 



are quietened. The quiet mind shows no sign of being separate from the 
Paramatma. It dies down, like a fire, and the Parabrahm Paramatma - the 
Brahman - manifests. 

When Kapildevji explained these methods of meditation, Devhuti asked 
some questions about Bhakti Yoga*. It is one thing to cultivate a habit of 
meditation, but it is quite different from developing a deep love and devotion 
for the Lord. So, Kapildevji gave some more clarifications about Bhakti. 

^THT 'iuir^lHIHH^r^^uilHJ 

De \aanaam gunalingaanaamaanushravikakarmanaam, 
Sattva e \aikamanaso vrittih svaabhaavikee tu yaa. 
Animittaa bhagavati bhaktih siddheVgareeyasee, 
Jarayatyaashu yaa kosham nigeeranamanalo yathaa. 
3.25.32,33. 

Our sense organs, alike, are demigods, who inform us about the sound, 
appearance, feel, flavor, and fragrance of objects. Use them well. The hand 
should be permitted to act only in accordance with what is right and proper. 
The feet should be allowed to move in a controlled manner. Similarly, the 
eyes, ears, and nose should not be allowed to function for the sake of 
satiating base desires. They should be controlled by the dictates of the 
scriptures, by religious tenets and by righteousness. Discipline of this kind 
brings satva* in the mind, and the mind becomes focused, and then you will 
acquire nishkaam bhakti*. 

It is not possible for bhakti to be acquired, so long as the desires in your 
heart flit amongst sense objects. It is only when you have no worldly desires 
that bhakti rises in the heart. Your mind must be quiet. Once you develop a 
genuine love for the Lord, it burns up and destroys the four koshas* of the 
soul. These are the annamaya*, manomaya*, praanmaya*, and 
vigyaanmaya* sheaths, which hide our true Self. As soon as these sheaths 
are burnt down, the individual forgets his individuality and merges with the 
Paramatma. 

Bhakti can dwell in any of three levels - tamasik*, rajasik* or satvik*. 
Tamasik bhakti is undertaken for cheating or destroying people. Rajasik 
bhakti is undertaken for worldly gain, but satvik bhakti is for attaining the 
Lord. There is a bhakti which is even higher than the satvik bhakti. 



68 



Laxanam bhaktiyogasya nirgunasya hyudaarhritam, 
Ahaitukyavyavahitaa yaa bhaktih purushottame\ 
3. 29. 12. ' 

What bhakti is that? It is the gunateeta* bhakti. Its indication is that as soon 
as the devotee hears any talk about the Lord, he becomes immersed in 
thoughts about Him. He visualizes, "See, here comes Sudamaji*. At the 
sight of His friend, the Lord puts Rukminiji aside. He has risen from his bed 
and is running towards Sudamaji. He is embracing Sudamaji, and His eyes 
are brimming with tears of joy." The Lord is devoted to the Brahmins; He 
has the inherent quality of looking after the lowly. When he hears about the 
qualities of the Lord, the devotee's thoughts flow effortlessly towards Him, 
just as the waters of the Ganga pour themselves into the sea. No further 
cause is needed, for them to get engrossed in thoughts about the Lord. The 
Lord is always seated in their heart, and is won over by such love and 
devotion. 

Madgunashrutimaatre ^na mayi sarvaguhaashaye \ 
Manogatirvicchinnaa yathaa gangaambhasombudhau. 
2. 29. 11. 

Kapildevji has mentioned here, some points which are not found elsewhere. 
While explaining the essence of bhakti, He says, 

Aham sarve ^shu bhooteaatmaavasthitah sadaa, 
Tamavagyaaya maam martyah kurute Vchaavidambanam. 
2. 29. 21. 

"I have made the bodies of all creatures My temple, and I am seated therein, 
as the Atman. So, when someone insults another - forgetting that I am 
seated in the heart of that person - and then makes a great display of 
ritualistic worship, it is mere mockery. 



69 



Dvishtah parakaaye^ maam maanino bhinnadarshinah, 
Bhoote ^shu baddhavairasya na manah shaantimricchati. 
3. 29. 23. 



If a man has hatred for someone, he hates Me, as I am seated in the heart of 
all. When he thinks he is great and special, and shows partiality for some 
and prejudice against others, he can never attain peace." 

Ahamucchaavacchairdravyaih kriyayotpannayaanaghe \ 

Naiva tushye Vchitorchaayam bhootagraamaavamaaninah. 3. 29. 24. 

The Lord also answered Devhuti's questions about birth and death, with a 
clarity not easily found elsewhere. He said: 

Dravyopalabdhisthaanasya dravyakshaayogyataa yadaa, 
Tatpanchatvamahamaanaadutpattirdravyadarshanam. 
3.31. 45. 

"The body has the ability to understand about external factors, just as an 
electric bulb has the capacity to light up with electricity. The body retains 
and responds to the subtle impressions caused by what it experiences. The 
body is considered dead when it loses this capacity. The five elements in the 
body merge into the five elements of the universe. 

In the same way, when we begin to view anything as T, we are born in that 
object. We see a person in a dream. We are aware that that person cannot be 
'me', but we start to identify with the dream body, anyway. In the same way, 
we believe some to be friend and some to be a foe. 

We begin to think of past and future births, when we take a bath in the 
Ganga, because we identify with this body which is having a bath. Just as a 
person is born in the dream, a person is born in the waking state because of 
identification with his body. Birth is when we get detached from one body 



70 



and attached to another. The Lord Shri Krishna has explained this to 
Uddhavji, in the eleventh Skandha. 



Vishayaabhinive ^she ^na naatmaanam yat smare ^tpunah, 
Jantorva kasyachidhe ^tormrityuratyantavismritih. 
Janma tvaatmatayaa punsah sarvabhaave ^na bhoorida, 
Vishayasveekriti praahuryathaa svapnamanorathah. 
11. 22. 38-39. 

While defining the essence of the Lord, Kapildevji said, "Take any object in 
your hand. For example, if you take a rose, your eyes will inform you that it 
is pink; your skin will inform you that it is soft; your tongue will reveal that 
it tastes bitter, and your nose will inform you of its fragrance. When it dries, 
and you crush it, your ears will inform you of the crackling sound it makes. 
Thus, although the rose is one object, your ears, skin, eyes, nose and tongue 
inform you about the qualities of sound, feel, appearance, smell and taste. 

Yathaindriyaih prithgdvaarairartho bahugunaashrayah, 
E^ko naaneyate^ tadvadbhagavaan shaastravartmabhih. 



The Lord is one, but people see Him colored by their own preferences, and 
He manifests with the sound, feel, appearance, taste, and fragrance of their 
imagination. The sacchidanandaghan* may take on the form of Varaha, or 
Matsya* - it is the same matter, sacchidananda. Just as you can design the 
gold you have, in the pattern of your choice, the Lord designs His forms as 
He wishes. The essence of the Lord is unchanging. He is everybody's 
Atman, and nothing truly exists, except the Atman. 

With regard to detachment from the world, Kapildevji said that people tend 
to remain attached to sense objects and worldly pleasures, all their lives. 
Ultimately, everybody has to leave all they love behind, when they die. A 
person goes to heaven or hell, as per his deeds, and then he is reborn. He is 
thus ensnared in the cycle of birth and death. When in the womb, he swears 




3. 32. 33. 



71 



to do bhajan* when he is born, but he forgets this pledge because he gets 
ensnared by Avidya.* 

H^lcHdi ^ <^Pd %^FR?qK^Tf^R?TT ^FT: I 

^nfq r^ifa o^y^iiH ^ crr4 1 1 3.^.3*-^ 

Naikaatmataam me' sprihayanti ke^chinmatpaadase\aabhirataa madeehah, 
Ye ^nyonyato bhaagavataah prasajya sabhaajayante " mama paurushaani. 
Pashyanti te^ me' ruchiraanyamba santah prasannavakraaruna-lochanaani, 
Roopani divyaani varapradaani saakam vaacham sprihaneeyaam vadanti. 
3. 25. 34-35. 

That is why the Saints say, "Come, let us see the Lord with open eyes, and 
delight in Him. It is pointless to enter into the condition of advait*. Of what 
use is Samadhi? Interaction is impossible in Samadhi, and anyway, we have 
no interest in worldly pleasures and problems. So, let four of us, intoxicated 
(by love for the Lord) people get together and delight in the Lord." 
When Saints get together, and consider the world to be the lotus feet of the 
Lord, they desire to serve it lovingly. Sometimes, they serve it as 
Hiranyagarbha*, or Brahmalok*, Goloka*, or Saketaloka*. Sometimes they 
serve the pragya* form of the Lord, and sometimes they experience the 
turiyapada brahmatmaikya*. All their actions are for the Lord. They spend 
all their time in discussing the actions and frolics of the Lord. The Lord's 
smiling visage, with the eyes full of love, is always before their eyes. His 
smile bestows joy. They see the Lord clearly, and He talks to them as well. 
Their whole behavior becomes God-filled. 

Kapildevji explained all the details and the science of Knowledge to His 
mother, Devhuti. He told her that the Atman and Paramatma are one, but 
seem separate, due to Avidya. Avidya means ignorance, nescience, and lack 
of proper understanding. Bhram is when we mistake something for 
something else, and agnan is when we totally lack knowledge. For example, 
if we see a rope, but don't know what it is, it is our agnan. If we see a rope 
and mistake it to be a snake, that is our bhram. Agnan is the cause, and 
bhram is the result of all kinds of ignorance. Worldly people are caught up in 
the whirlpool of Avidya and bhram. 

After giving His mother a detailed discourse, Kapildevji bowed to her, and 
went away to Gangasagar, where the sea welcomed Him. 



72 



Devhuti left the airship made by Kardamji and returned to her old life of 
austerity. She became completely unconcerned about her physical needs. 
Her handmaidens would feed and dress her. She was, at first, filled with 
anguish for her son, Kapildevji, but then she attained atmabodha*. She 
became a liberated soul, totally free of sorrow. 

The third Skandha of the Bhagwat thus narrates the episode of the Visarga- 
sarga - which means the incidents of the daiva sarga and the asura sarga. It 
contains the liberation of both men and women, but there is no description of 
Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakashipu being liberated, even though they were the 
attendants of the Lord. No one can be liberated if a demonic tendency enters 
their mind. Liberation is only for those whose minds are filled with godly 
tendencies, whether they are men or women. 

We now enter the fourth Skandha of the Bhagwat. It contains many excellent 
topics. Preachers tend to narrate them as mere stories. They do not try to 
grasp the subtle messages behind the stories. Their ego prevents them from 
seeking clarifications from learned people. However, I am hopeful that you 
will try to understand the significance of these stories. 
The fourth Skandha is divided into four portions - Dharma*, Artha*, Kama* 
and Moksha*. The portion of Dharma is given in the first seven chapters, 
and contains the sapta tantu yagya. The next five chapters give the Artha 
portion. The Kamana* portion is given in the following eleven chapters, and 
the Mukti portion in eight chapters, describing freedom from the Ashtadhaa 
Prakriti*. 

The Dharma portion explains that ritual worship is successful only when 
undertaken with devotion to the Lord and dependence upon Him. The sage 
Atri undertook several great Yagyas, doing them as a part of Dharma, and 
the Lord manifested as his son. 

There is one episode, which is given in some other Puranas, but not in the 
Bhagwat. It is about an occasion when Sati*, Laxmi* and Savitri* were 
discussing who the greatest Sati in the world was. Each felt that she 
deserved that title. Naradji came by and told them that the greatest sati in the 
world is Anasuya, the wife of Atri. 

The one, who does not see people's faults, is called anasuya. Asuya means - 
VfTf qhirci^Muj 'gune ^shu doshaavishkaranam ', and anasuya means 3^7R%?t 
' asuyaarahitam ' - the one who gives birth to the Lord. Atri means the one 
who is free of the three Gunas. Another interpretation is 3^ 3# 'atraiva 
atri' - who is here, and despite being here, is beyond the three Gunas; 
beyond the three stages of waking, sleeping and dreaming. That Paramatma, 
that Brahman, is called Atri. And Anasuya is the one who is filled with 
goodwill and does not see the faults. 



73 



When Savitri, Laxmi and Sati heard Naradji say that Anasuya is the greatest 
Sati, they requested their husbands, Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh, to test her 
devotion to Atri. When they went to Anasuya, she used her spiritual powers 
(obtained through her devotion to her husband) to turn them into her sons. 
Shankarji became Durvasa, Brahmaji became Chandrama* and Vishnu 
became Dattatreya. 

The purpose of this narration is to explain that worship is fulfilled when it is 
undertaken with devotion to the Lord. When undertaken with arrogance, the 
ritual worship does not succeed. The Daksha Yagya episode shows this 
clearly. Daksha was the personification of an inflated ego. He was the son of 
Brahmaji and the ruler of the Prajapatis*, but his Yagya was unsuccessful 
because it was undertaken for the sake of vanity and publicity. 
Now tomorrow, you will hear about the characters of Dhruva, Prithu, 
Prachinvarhi, and the Prachetas. Before these characters, you will hear about 
Sati and Daksha' s Yagya. 

Om Shantih! Shantih! Shantih! 



74 



BHAGWATAMRIT 



Pravarchan IV 
(Skandha IV) 

Repetition results in greater absorption of the subject discussed. You were 
told, earlier, that the first Skandha of the Bhagwat is called the 'Adhikari 
Skandha'. It describes the levels of suitability of the speakers and listeners, 
Suta-Shaunaka, Narad- Vyas, and Shuka-Parikshit. Some speak and listen as 
just a routine Dharma. Some for the benefit of the world, and some - who 
believe in the Nirguna form of the Lord, speak and listen to obtain 
Brahmatmaikya Bodha*. 

You were also told that the second Skandha is called the 'Sadhan* Skandha.' 
It states that shravan* is the main sadhan, and it has three branches - 
dhyan*, shraddha and samadhan*. 

In the third Skandha, you heard about how the world's population expands, 
and the divisions of the Asuras and Devtas. Hiranyaksha and 
Hiranyakashipu are from the Asura population, and Kardam-Devhuti, 
Swaymbhuva Manu-Shatroopa's linage is from the demi-gods. The cause for 
all this is the Lord. 

Now the fourth Skandha is before us. It is called the 'Visarga Skandha'. 
Visarga means special, and full of variety. It describes what a human can 
achieve through a determined effort. It is the Lord who gives the visarga, so 
the Lord is described after describing the visarga. 

As mentioned yesterday, the fourth Skandha of the Bhagwat contains four 
topics - Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha. Artha is outside us, is desired 
by all, and is prone to change. That which keeps moving away, which does 
not stay with one person, is called Artha. Kama stays in the mind. All our 
joys and sorrows and pleasures are in the mind. Kama is internal, whereas 
Artha is external. Dharma stays in the intellect, so that it can control both 
wealth and desire. 

It is important to understand whether our desires are controlled by our 
knowledge (of what is right). Are we able to control our mind and sense 
organs at will? Does the vehicle of our body and mind have brakes or not? 
God knows where we'll end up, if there are no brakes. So, we need the 
control of Dharma to be established in our intellect. If the intellect is alert 
and strong, we can enjoy and indulge safely with discrimination. If not, we 
will be trapped. 



75 



As for Moksha, it is a form of the Atman. We do not obtain it, we become 
aware of it. Our Atman is free from all divisions and separateness. All the 
perceived differences are illusions, created by our own lack of realization 
and awareness of the All-pervading Atman, who supports this mirage. The 
Atman is the sub-stratum, and the source of this projection. That is why the 
Atman is always liberated. 

Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha are all achieved by purushartha*. The 
word 'purushartha' is commonly used these days to indicate the qualities of 
a person who is active and hard working. In Sanskrit, however, it is the 
object of human desire which is called purushartha - ^fcT J T^W^: ' 

purushaih arthyate " iti purushrthah '. Thus we understand what it is that we 
desire. Do we desire wealth, or sensual pleasures, or righteousness, or 
liberation? What does our intellect lead us towards? Which direction is our 
life moving in? 

What is the message of the first seven chapters (of the fourth Skandha) 
which speak of Dharma? Dharma is dhriti pradhan*. It is the same root of 
dhri, which creates the word dharma and also the word dhriti. When Manuji 
wrote the treatise upon Manav Dharma*, he wrote dhriti first, as in ^frT: ^FfT 
^frs"^T ^Wh^F^s: dhriti kshamaa damoasteyam 

shauchamindriyanigrahah '. So, the mental ability to hold on to what is right, 
is called Dharma. 

Now, consider whether Daksha's Yagya has Dharma or not. Daksha was the 
King of the Prajapatis*. He was the son of Brahma, a learned and powerful 
Brahmin who had undertaken tapasya. The Court was in session, with 
Brahma, Shiva, and others already seated, when Daksha strode in as the 
King. Everyone stood up in respect, except Brahma and Shankarji*. 
Dhaksha thought to himself, "It is proper for Brahmaji to not get up, since he 
is my father. Shiva, however, is younger than me. I allowed him to marry 
my daughter, at the behest of my father Brahmaji, but that still makes him 
my junior. He should stand up when I enter." Daksha began to hurling 
abuses at Shankarji, feeling that he had been insulted in public. An arrogant 
man loses his mental balance if he feels slighted. 

^^mrn^ Tnwti?T ^fewf ^fm 

Sabhaamadhye " maanabhangaat buddhibhransho bhave V dhruvam. 

The enraged Daksha spoke abusively about Shakarji's behavior. Those who 
felt that Shankarji had done nothing wrong began to retort. Both sides started 
to curse each other. The Shaivas* and the Vaishnavas* began to quarrel with 



76 



each other. The Vaishnavas declared that anyone who worshipped Shiva 
would be demeaned, and the Shaivites declared that whoever worshipped 
Vishnu would be demeaned. 

Shankarji, however, refused to participate in all this quarrelling. He said, 
"Do what you want, I am leaving", and walked out quietly. He said nothing 
to his wife, Sati, when he reached home. He felt it would only distress her. 
One should never cause distress. One should absorb all thoughts likely to 
cause sorrow or agitation, whether it is among friends, or within the family. 
So, Shankarji remained silent about what had happened, and began to do 
bhajan. The matter was forgotten. 

How could Daksha rest in peace? He organized a Yagya with the intention 
of insulting Shankarji. A Yagya motivated by jealousy, or hatred, or 
competitiveness, can never give good results. How can it be Dharma, if the 
cause itself is wrong? Daksha invited all the demigods to his Yagya, but 
deliberately left out Shankarji. 

When Satiji heard that her father has organized a great Yagya, and all the 
devatas were going, she wanted to go, too. She spoke about this to Shankarji, 
referring to the passages of Dharma which said that there is no harm in 
going uninvited to the home of the father, husband or guru. "So, I will go," 
she stated. "All my sisters will be going; my mother and father will both be 
there. It will be a great pleasure to meet everybody." 

Shankarji tried to warn her, "You see, Devi*, there is no harm in going if the 
invitation is not sent due to an oversight. Where the lack of an invitation is 
deliberate, and due to a sullied heart, then one should not go to such a 
function." 

In case of a dispute between husband and father, a woman's duty is to side 
with her husband, because her life is linked to his. Satiji was annoyed when 
Shankarji told her not to go. She looked at him with such anger that it 
seemed as if she would burn him to cinders. Ultimately, she decided to go 
alone. When she came to the front door, the attendants brought her Shivaji's 
vehicle, the bull. When she rode on the bull behind Shankarji, she looked 
very dignified, but now she mounted him alone. The bull - vrishabha - is 
not only the vehicle of Shakti*, it is Dharma itself. It is Vivek 
(Discrimination) and Gnan, (knowledge), accompanying Shakti. Shakti 
should always be accompanied by discrimination and knowledge. Dharma 
gets divided when Shakti is separated from Gnan. 

Having ignored Shankarji's words, Sati came to Daksha's Yagya, but she 
was not welcomed. Her mother spoke affectionately, but her sisters laughed 
with derision, and Daksha didn't meet her at all. 



77 



Shocked by this reception, Sati went to the Yagya mandap*. She noticed that 
no seat had been kept for Shankarji, and understood why no invitation had 
been sent to them. She also understood why Shankarji wanted to stop her 
from coming. Anger rose in her and she began to tell her father a few home 
truths. The Vaishnavas should pay heed to one point raised by her: 

Yaddvayaksharam naama gire Vitam nrinaam 
Sakritprasangaadaghamaashu hanti tat, 
Pavitrakeerti tamalangyashaasanam 
Bhavaanaho dve ^shti shivam shive ^tarah. 
4.4.14. 

"Father, just see - it is a name of just two syllables - 'shi-va'. If a person 
takes this name just once, for whatever reason, he gets free from sin and 
suffering. But you see him - my Lord, who is beyond all worldly regulations 
- with hatred in your eyes. That proves that it is you who is inauspicious. I 
do not wish to have a body which is born of such a father. If I return, and 
Shankarji addresses me as the daughter of Daksha, I will die of 
mortification." 

Saying this, Sati created yogagni* and burnt herself to ashes in the 
yagyashala* itself. There was an uproar. The attendants who had 
accompanied Satiji began to vent their fury by breaking up everything in the 
vicinity. Bhriguji chanted a mantra which induced all the Brahmins to side 
with Daksha, and send Shankarji 's attendants off. 

Shankarji had gone into deep meditation, after Satiji defied him and left. 
Many days passed, and Shankarji thought that she would return when she 
wants to, after enjoying the company of her family. So, he was quite relaxed. 
The attendants who had gone with Satiji had not told him of what transpired 
at the Yagya. They were ashamed that they had helped her to go, against his 
wishes, and even accompanied her. Further, that they had been thrashed and 
dispatched after she burnt herself by the yogagni. So, they did not have the 
moral courage to face him. 

Many days later, Naradji came to Shankarji and asked about Satiji. "She has 
gone to her father's house," Shankarji told him. 

"Has gone, or had gone?" asked Naradji, and told him the whole story. 



78 



Bhagwan Shankar's temper flared up when he heard this. Just as people claw 
at their body in anger, Shankarji pulled out a hair from his head and threw it. 
It turned into Veerbhadra, who went to Daksha's Yagya and broke it up. The 
Shivamahimnastotra* has a long verse about this: 

3teiflu|IHlfo**i WK W^TT: ^FTT: I 

Kriyaadaksho dakshah kratupatiradheeshastanubhritaam 
Risheenaamartvijyam sharanada sadasyaah suraganaah, 
Kratubhranshatvattah kratufalavidhaanavyasanino 
Druvam kartuh shraddhaavidhuramabhichaaraaya hi makhaah. 

A project undertaken with devotion is fulfilled, but one which lacks 
devotion, and is motivated by jealousy, hatred, or a desire to demean, will 
never be fulfilled. So, Daksha's Yagya was destroyed by the very Lord who 
gives the reward of the worship. 

Veerabhadra tore off the beards of those who had laughed when he broke up 
the Yagya. He broke the teeth of those who had bared their teeth at him. He 
placed Daksha's head into the ritual fire, where the sacrificial animal's head 
is placed. The great devotees who had participated in the Yagya scurried, 
bruised and battered, to apprise Brahmaji of the latest development. 
Brahmaji is the grandfather of all beings. He is the demigod for Shanti*. He 
took everybody along, and went to Shankarji. 

Shankarji is Ashutosh*, too. He told Brahmaji, "Daksha is but a child. I do 
not take him seriously - ^inni cFt^ RT^R^ 'naagham praje^sha 

baalaanaam varnaye ' naanuchintaye " '. He forgave Daksha. Since Daksha's 
head had been burnt in the sacrificial fire, a goat's head was attached to his 
body. 

Even if you consider this sheer imagination, what an incredible feat of 
surgery it would be, to attach a head to another's body! Such descriptions 
are also to be found in the Upanishads. The Ashwini Kumars had cut off the 
head of Dadhichi*, and he gave a sermon through the head of a horse. Those 
who do not believe in the practice of knowledge being handed down from 
generation to generation interpret the Vedas at whim, but that is not the 
authentic interpretation. 

So, Shankarji arranged for a goat's head to be attached to Daksha's burnt 
head. A goat's beard was attached to Bhriguji's chin. Poosha was told that 
his stomach would be filled by the food eaten by the person who undertook a 



79 



Yagya in future. Then the Lord Vishnu appeared at the Yagya, and was 
praised by all the demigods. The ritual of Daksha's Yagya was concluded in 
the proper manner. 

Dharma is successful only when connected with the Lord. The Lord is the 
Creator, Sustainer and Destroyer of the whole world. A person who has no 
reverence for the Lord may undertake ritual worship, thinking it to be 
Dharma, but it will not bring the desired results. The Lord is the one who 
bestows the fruit of Dharma. Action is inanimate, and is carried out by the 
organs of action, which are also inanimate by themselves. Hence, it is not 
possible for any ritual to be fruitful unless there iss faith in the bestower of 
the fruit. 

The seven chapters in the fourth Skandha are the seven steps of the Yagya. 
They are used to describe the stories which reveal the essence of Dharma. 
Kama and Artha are both controlled by Dharma. A person who is not guided 
by righteousness will eat, drink, speak, and do whatever he feels like. His 
life will lack self control. It will also be disorganized and undisciplined. 
The dharna Shakti* of Dharma is required for a well regulated life. 
Everything has Dharma. The mango tree and the jasmine creeper have their 
Dharma about how to grow and when to bloom. All particles have their own 
Dharma. Whatever lacks Dharma is destroyed. An object is protected by its 
own Dharma, its own right pattern of existence. 

The topic of Artha comes next. You are aware that Swayambhuva Manu had 
two sons - Uttanapada and Priyavrata. Of the two, Uttanapada rose to great 
heights. He had access to all. He had two wives - one was Suniti and the 
other was Suruchi. The wife who is ethical is called Suniti. A King should 
walk the ethical path. The wife, who pleases the King by agreeing with his 
every inclination, is called Suruchi. The King who walks the path of self- 
indulgence does beget a son (result), which seems to be good, but does not 
bring lasting good. It is ultimately destroyed. The King guided by Suniti gets 
a son like Dhruva, resulting in great benefits. Dhruva means that which 
endures, which is never destroyed. Suniti means sunder (beautiful) + niti 
(principles), and suruchi means sunder+ruchi (desirability). 
King Uttanapada preferred Suruchi to Suniti. One day, he sat with Uttam - 
the son of Suruchi - on his lap, when Dhruva - the son of Suniti - 
approached, and wanted to sit on his father's lap, too. However, Uttanapada 
did not welcome him; nor did he lift him up on his lap. Suruchi told Dhruva, 
"Son, if you wish to sit on your father's lap, go and worship the Lord; Use 
the spiritual powers you gain, to enter my womb. You will attain the throne 
when you are born as my son." 



80 



"^nWrRR ^feftT ^TRRTT I I XZ.^ 

Tapasaaraadhya purusham tasyaivaanugrahe ^na me \ 

Garbhe^ tvam saadhyaatmaanam yadeechchasi nripaasanam. 4.8.13. 

Just note one point. Suruchi did not tell Dhruva that he would attain his 
father's lap through the Lord's worship. What she said was, "After you 
worship the Lord and die, you will obtain the entry to my womb, and only 
when you are born as my son, will you reach the throne." 
Suruchi's words were an insult to the Lord's worship, power, and 
manifestation. What she indicated was that obtaining her womb was the 
primary objective, and worship of the Lord was the means for attaining it. 
Hearing these words from his step-mother, poor Dhruva began to cry, 
because he longed to sit on his father's lap. Weeping bitterly, he went to his 
mother, Suniti. Servants had already reported the incident to her. Even after 
hearing everything, there was no envy in Suniti 's heart. Nor did she find 
fault with the King. She spoke without agitation, "My son - w^ttsM^T: W 
' sapatnyaabhihitah panthaah ' - what my saut* has said is indeed the best 
path for you. It is the Lord who has given your father his status. Your 
grandfather, Swayambhuva Manu, also got his status from the Lord. It is 
quite true that you cannot obtain this status unless you worship the Lord. So 
go, my dear, and worship Him." 

As soon as he heard his mother's words, Dhruva resolved to worship the 
Lord. True to his decision, he left the palace. See the Leela of the Lord. 
Obstacles are removed automatically from the path of those who are headed 
towards the Lord. Moreover, the path, too, is made easier for them. 
Dhruva encountered Naradji as soon as he left the palace. At first, Naradji 
said, "My child, you are so young! Respect and insult should not affect little 
children. Why are you getting influenced by the innate nature of a warrior? 
This world is such that respect and disdain are routine for everyone. One 
should disregard them, and carry on." 

Dhruva replied, "No, Sir. My Mother and my Stepmother have both said that 
I should worship the Lord. This is why I left home. See my good fortune - 
the moment I step out of my house, the Lord sends you to me. I am the son 
of a Kshatriya*. I will not turn back until I have attained my goal, even if it 
takes me several births." 

Please note that Dhruva did not bow down to Naradji. A child has no need 
for formal etiquette, so Dhruva's behavior was natural and simple. Naradji 
was impressed by Dhruva's resolution. He immediately gave the 
dvaadashakshara mantra* to Dhruva, and taught him how to do japa*. He 



81 



directed Dhruva to the river Yamuna. "There is a forest near Mathura, called 
the Madhuvan. Stay there and worship the Lord." 

Dhruva undertook a worship of great hardship. At first he took only fruits 
and flowers. Then he sustained only on water, and then only on air, and 
ultimately, he even stopped breathing, as he stood on one foot in ascetic 
worship. The air within the individual was immersed in the universal air. 
Dhruva lost all consciousness of individuality. Hence, when he stopped 
breathing, it affected the breath of all beings. This frightened the Devtas, and 
they rushed to the Lord. 

The Lord reassured them, saying that He would make sure that Dhruva' s 
tapasya would end soon. Then the Lord mounted His eagle, Garuda - who 
symbolizes the word - and manifested in His four armed form before 
Dhruva. In His four hands were the Shankha*, Chakra*, Gada* and Padma*. 
Dhruva, however, was in deep meditation and his eyes were closed. So, the 
Lord drew away His image in Dhruva' s heart. Dhruva' s eyes opened. He 
saw the Lord before him, granting the vision of His four armed form. 
Dhruva was stunned by the Lord's beauty. His eyes were filled with tears, 
his body began to tingle, his throat felt choked, and his heart was overcome 
with love for the Lord. He fell at the Lord's feet, wanting to eulogize the 
Lord. The Lord understood his wish, and touched Dhruva' s cheek with His 
Shankha. The Lord's conch shell is the personification of the sound of the 
Vedas, W^t fJW 'pasparsha baalam kripayaa kapole " '. 
What is the Shankha? i\ # fe^ 3rot w: 'Sham khe y chidre " yasya asau 
shankhah ' - that, which contains peace within its surface openings, is called 
Shankha. At the touch of the Shankha, Dhruva acquired knowledge about 
the Lord. He folded his hands and began to speak: 

44)c|i|^|ftsM*lRd£R: *WRTI 
WWTf ^TFT cpFTI I 

Yoantah pravishya mama vaachamimaam prasuptaam 
Sanjeevayatyakhilashaktidharah svadhaamnaa, 
Anyaanshcha hastacharanashravanatvagaadeen 
Praanaannamo bhagavate^ purushaaya tubhyam. 
4.9.6. 

"Lord, You are seated in my heart. You awaken my slumbering power of 
speech, and enable me to speak. You uphold all my powers and abilities. My 



82 



hands and feet move with Your strength. My skin is able to feel, thanks to 
You, and my eyes see because of Your power. You are never far from me. 
This is the stotra* by which You can be caught. The world does not begin 
from where we think it begins; the world begins from where we begin to 
feel. This is its way. The past, present and future tenses all begin where my 
T is, just as the Lord who abides in all hearts, is seated in my heart. The rest 
is nothing but agnan*. 

Ya nirvritistanubhirtaam tava 

paadapadmadhyaanaadbhavajjanakathaashravane ^na yaa syaat, 

Sa brahmani svamahimanyapi naatha maa bhoot kirn 

tvantakaasilulitaatpatataam vimaanaat 

4.9.10 

Lord, the people in heaven fall off their airplanes, when their time is up. 
They are afraid that death will occur any moment. However, if we get 
engrossed in meditating upon Your lotus feet, and listen to discourses about 
You, given lovingly by Your devotees, we experience a deep joy, the like of 
which is not experienced even in Brahamnanda*." 

Brahmananda is shantananda*, but vishayanand* is, of course, 
vikshepananda*. The smaran* and discussions of the Lord, are free of both 
vikshep and samadhi. It is to experience the bliss of a Brahman who is alive 
and awake, who walks and interacts. It is not the happiness of intoxication 
and unconsciousness; nor the pleasure of sense objects. In this, you can 
listen, and go on listening, and continue to experience the joy of the Divine. 
It is like an immediate cash reward, with tears of joy, a joyful tingling of the 
body, a heart brimming with love, and a mental absorption in the 
Paramananda*. 

When Dhruva eulogized the Lord thus, He granted him a boon, saying, "I 
give you a position which even your Grandfather Swayambhuva Manu could 
not attain, and nor could your Father, Uttanapada. Not only these two, but 
none else have attained, and nor will any attain in future." 
See what results worship can bring! Dhruva was given everything he had 
prayed for, and every need of his path was fulfilled. Yet, his heart was filled 
with regret, as he returned home. He had obtained everything he desired but 
he rued the fact that he could have asked for the Lord, Himself, instead of 
praying for worldly boons. 



83 



Dhruva was welcomed with great warmth when he reached his city. He first 
met Uttam's mother, Suruchi, telling her that she was his first Guru. "It was 
upon your advice, that I worshipped the Lord," he said. Then the King, 
Uttanapada, handed over the Crown to Dhruva, and went into the forest to 
meditate. Dhruva began to rule and was called 'Rajarshi'*. 
A strange incident occurred after this. Suruchi 's son, Uttam, had gone on a 
hunt, and was killed by a Yaksha*. Suruchi went to look for him and was 
burnt to ashes. 

This is the fate of suruchi - it is always transient. Worldly pleasures never 
last. What we consider to be real and excellent, turn out to be just the 
opposite after some time. The only everlasting and unchanging factor is the 
Paramatma. 

When Dhruva heard that the Yaksha had killed his brother, his attachment to 
his brother welled up. Dhruva' s worldly attachments had not been destroyed 
by his worship, since he had worshipped only for worldly benefits. Now he 
was overcome with anger, and he attacked the Yakshas with his army. A 
fierce battle ensued. Dhruva was about to use the Narayanastra*, which 
would burn all the Yakshas to cinders, but just then his Grandfather, 
Swayambhuva Manu came there. Manuji told Dhruva that he should not 
allow anger to overcome his better sense - src^nfcRt^l 'alam 

vatsaatiroshe ^na '. Anger is a sin. 

Krodha blocks the spring of joy in our hearts. Anger comes with the purpose 
of blocking the Paramananda, which springs from our eyes, ears, nose, 
tongue, and skin, to fill our lives. Anger's nature is such that it first burns the 
heart in which it flares up. 

Swayambhuva Manu said, "Son, you have had a vision of the Lord. Why 
should you harbor such anger in your heart? One Yaksha wronged your 
brother, but you want to kill all the Yakshas. Why don't you understand that 
neither did your brother kill the Yaksha, nor did the Yaksha kill your 
brother? All that is going on is the play of the Lord. So, call an end to the 
war, and see how pleased the Lord becomes." 

Titikshayaa karunayaa maitryaa chaakhilajantushu, 
Samatve ^na cha sarvaatmaa bhagavaan sampraseedati. 
4.11.13. 



84 



Having forbearance towards our seniors, compassion towards our juniors, 
friendship for equals, and equanimity towards all creatures, is the best way 
to please the Lord. 

You see, the company and advice of Mahatmas achieves what even a vision 
of the Lord can't achieve. The reason is that the Lord is present, but 
intangible, and the Mahatma is present, and is tangible, and on the same 
earth. This phenomenon is found in many incidents, in the Bhagwat. Twelve 
bhagwats* are described in the Shrimad Bhagwat, of which Swayambhuva 
Manu is one. He successfully quietened Dhruva's anger. Kuber, the King of 
the Yakshas, came and offered his hand in friendship. A strong bond of 
affection grew between Kuber and Dhruva. Kuber granted him a boon, that 
he would have unshaken devotion for the Lord. 

Dhruvaji then handed over his kingdom to his son, and went to the forest to 
do tapasya. Ultimately, the Lord sent an airplane, with attendants, for 
Dhruva. Dhruvaji took a bath in the Yamuna, completed all the evening 
rituals, and prepared to get on to the plane. Death came, and stood before 
him. "I am Death. I come to every creature who is born and who has a body. 
This is my duty, my Dharma." 

"Come", said Dhruvaji. When she came close, he placed his foot on her head 
and got on to the plane. The significance of getting on the plane sent by the 
Lord is to become free of ego. Only a person who is free of ego can get on to 
the plane of God. The plane is unable to bear the weight of vanity or 
arrogance. 

When Dhruva attained his land, Naradji thought one day, about how he had 
given the mantra and guidance, which enabled Dhruva to obtain a vision of 
the Lord and then the Dhruvaloka*. "Let me go and see how my disciple is 
faring," he thought, and went to Dhruva. To his surprise, he saw tears fall 
steadily from Dhruva's eyes. 

"Dhruva, why do you weep?" asked Naradji. Dhruva replied, "Sir, I attained 
the Lord and asked only for Dhruvaloka! I did not ask for the Lord! I weep 
because I regret my folly." Naradji was happy to hear this answer and went 
round telling people how true a devotee Dhruva was. 

Utkal was a son of Dhruva, who became an ascetic. He was continuously 
immersed in the experience of the oneness of the Atma and the Brahman. He 
refused to accept the throne. Dhruva's second son, Vatsar, was crowned 
when Dhruva went away to the forest. 

Later on, in the same lineage, there was a King called Anga. He was wedded 
to the grand daughter (daughter's daughter) of Death. What will be the 
condition of the home in which Death's grand daughter comes? What will 
her child be like? This is the reason our scriptures advise us to examine the 



85 



lineage of the bride. The background of her family should be checked, 
before she is accepted, since the temperament of her parents and 
Grandparents, all leave their impact upon her. 

At first, Anga's wife did not have any sons. He consulted the Brahmins and 
undertook a Putreshti Yagya*, and had a son. The son, called Vena, had 
inherited the temperament of his mother's father. He loved to harass people, 
even as a child. A Raja* is one who gives ranjan* to his people. The Dharma 
Shastras* state clearly, that the King who sees to the good of his people, has 
devansha*, but the King who harasses his people is a rakshasa*. 

Prajaahitakaro raajaa de \anshoanyashcha raakshasah. 

Raja Vena was like a demon. People saw death wherever he went. His 
father, Anga, tried in every possible way, to make him mend his ways, but 
he paid no heed. Anga lamented, in deep anguish, to have such a wicked 
person born into their noble lineage. 

One day, a quality inherited from Dhruva, arose in Anga's mind. He said, 
"God is good, to give me a wicked son. If my son had been good, I would 
have been trapped by my affection for him. Now I can become totally 
detached from the world, and do bhajan." Saying this, he left the Kingdom, 
and went to the forest to do bhajan. 

When Vena was crowned King, he had it announced throughout his realm, 
that henceforth, all ritual worships and giving alms to the poor were 
forbidden. He banned every activity pertaining to Dharma. 

Na yashtavyam na daatavyam na hotavyam dvijaah kvachit, 
Iti nyavaarayaddharmam bhaireeghoshe^na sarvashah. 
4.14.6. 

When a person protects Dharma, Dharma also protects him - wft T^lfrr Tf^r?T: 
'dharmo rakshati rakshitah '. The word Dharma is interpreted in two ways, 
in the Sanskrit language. The first is fSR?f ^fcT 'dhriyate " janaih iti 
dharmah' - Dharma is what people uphold in their lives. The second 
definition is: 



86 



Dharmah puny ah yamah svabhaavaachaarasomapaah. 
That, which protects the people, is called Dharma. 

Vena put a stop to all activities which good people approve of. People were 
full of fear. Seeing how matters stood, the learned people, Brahmins, and 
Mahatmas, called a meeting to decide what should be done. How can people 
be saved if there is no Dharma? "We should go to Vena and warn him," they 
decided. So, they went to him in a large group. 

"Your Majesty," they said, "It is Dharma which protects you. We are 
concerned that your Dharma may be destroyed." 

Vena told them that they were great fools - ^#mT w\ °TT 'baalishaa bata 
yuyam vaa '. "I organize your food, water and housing. I am the father who 
guides your activities. I am the Lord of the world. Who are you, to believe in 
any other God but me?" 

The group of wise men made an angry sound - hunh - of disdain, and Vena 
died with the impact. The Mahatmas departed, but Vena's mother, Suneetha, 
had his body lifted up and preserved. 

Who was to control the people, now? If there is a King who is righteous, 
undertakes religious rituals, and leads an exemplary life, then he leads the 
people on the righteous path. The lack of a ruler brought anarchy to the land. 
People began to do whatever they pleased. Dacoits and thieves increased 
rapidly, ^pft ^^ftfcT FrfFTFT 'Nashye 7 trayee dandaneeti hataayaam ' - 
when there is no one to punish the wrongdoers, then the eternal laws of the 
Vedas disappear. It is difficult to control people when there is no threat of 
punishment, because people indulge fearlessly in lawlessness. 
The Mahatmas were filled with anxiety when they saw this anarchy. They 
churned Vena's body. Out of his arms emerged Prithu, and his wife, 
symbolizing the Paalini Shakti*, and were crowned King and Queen. They 
were congratulated by the people. The Devtas each gave their powers to 
Prithu, as an offering. The hungry and thirsty people came up to Prithu 
during the crowning ceremony, praying for succor. A King's first duty is to 
ensure that his people have food and water. 

Prithu asked the people, "Where does the grain, which grows from the Earth, 
go?" The people replied that it dissolves into the Earth. "There is no 
ploughing, no planting of seeds. Then, how can the earth give grain? That is 
why people snatch and steal whatever they can." 

Prithu picked up his arrow and chased the Earth. The significance of this is 
that he took up all the implements used for farming, declaring that he would 
dig up and sift every little patch of land. The Earth folded her hands and 
said, "Sir, whatever you desire, please milk me for it." 



87 



Please note that Prithu did not show any preference about who should get 
food and who shouldn't. He organized food for all creatures, including 
snakes scorpions, Yakshas, Rakshases, and Devtas. He protected the seed of 
all. He organized that water should be available for growing crops even in 
arid areas. He leveled the land, breaking down little hillocks and large 
mounds. He tilled the hardened earth and softened it with water. He 
organized, in accordance with the science given in our scriptures, how and 
where villages, towns, districts and cities should be built. Thus, Prithu took 
care of all the arrangements for all the needs of all his people. The people 
were overjoyed to have all their needs fulfilled. When all were satisfied and 
happy, Prithu organized a Yagya. The Yagya involves both aadaan and 
pradaan. Aadaan is to take from those who have a store of wealth and 
pradaan is to give to the needy. 

Indra tried to place obstacles in Prithu 's Yagya. He repeatedly did all kinds 
of foul mischief to prevent its successful completion. He stole the Yagya' s 
horse. Ultimately, Prithu got angry and decided to kill Indra. Brahmaji 
explained to him, that Indra is the Yagya Devta, the Lord of the Yagya, the 
Yagya' s inspiration. He is the one who stands by and helps in carrying out 
the ritual, and he is the one who accepts the oblations. It is not proper to kill 
him. 

The Lord Vishnu appeared, and interceded between Prithu and Indra. He 
said, ^RTWT 3iichhh^ ^mjh^Rh "Kshamaapayata aatmaanamamushya 
kshantumarhasi ' - Prithu, Indra has come to seek your forgiveness. Forgive 
him." 

After that, Prithu and Indra became good friends. They embraced each other 
warmly, and worshipped the Lord with reverence. Prithu caught the feet of 
the Lord, as He prepared to depart. Tears fell from his eyes, as he held the 
Lord's feet lovingly. 

The Lord told Prithu to ask for a boon. "What do you desire?" He asked. 
Prithu replied, "What more could I desire - You are the greatest boon! When 
I have obtained You, what item should I ask for? To ask You for a boon is 
like a girl wanting to marry a particular man, and that man offers to get her 
married to whoever she wishes to marry! However, if You insist, then I ask 
for ten thousand ears, through which I can listen to talks about Your 
glories." 

Vidhatsva karnnaayutame ^sha me " varah. 



88 



The fact, is, my brother, that the world enters our hearts not so much through 
our eyes, as much as through our ears. That is why the world will be unable 
to enter, if our hearts are filled with thoughts of the Lord. This world is not 
made up of bricks and stones; it is the illusion of 'me' and 'mine' which 
creates our world. Shri Shankaracharya Maharaj says: 

Karttritvabhoktritvalakshanah sansaarah. 

"The egoistic feeling of doership and enjoyership is called the sansar*. 
Release from 'me' and 'mine', therefore, is release from the world. A person 
leads the life of a liberated soul when he is free of the world." 
Prithu gave his people a sermon on Dharma, after obtaining a vision of the 
Lord. It is one of the duties of a King, to educate his people, apart from 
maintaining law and order, and collecting taxes. Prithu undertook to educate 
his people, and gave a sermon to all in his realm. He told them to have faith 
in the Lord, and carry out their allotted duties with the attitude of 
worshipping the Lord through their work. 

Now, all Prithu' s tasks were completed. He undertook ninety nine Yagyas, 
but got the reward of one hundred Yagyas. When a Yagya is sakaam*, there 
is an urgency to complete it. However, when a Yagya is nishkaam*, there is 
no such necessity. Since Prithu' s Yagyas had no worldly motive, the Lord 
completed the hundredth Yagya for him. 

The Sanakadi Mahatmas then came to Prithu, to fulfill his life and 
aspirations. Prithu rose from his throne when he saw them enter the Court. 
He made them sit upon his throne, and welcomed them with full honors. 
Prithu had an outstanding personality. He was tall and well built, fair 
complexioned, with long arms. He spoke with such eloquence that his 
people listened enthralled, when he spoke to them. Every word of his seeped 
into their hearts. This excellent King stood up respectfully when the 
Mahatmas came. He asked, "Sirs, how do I enquire whether all is well with 
you, because - 

Bhavatsu kushalaprashna aatmaaraame ^shu nse ^ shy ate \ 

There is no desire in you, to enjoy worldly pleasures, so how do I ask what 
you acquired and what you missed? How do I ask what you possess and 
what you lack? You are unconcerned with mental and physical comforts. 
Since you have graced me by coming here, please tell me what I should do 



89 



for my ultimate good. The people have chosen me to be their representative, 
so on their behalf and my own, I ask you to tell us which is the way for the 
well being of all." 

Tadaham kritavishrambhah suhrido vastapasvinaam, 
Samprichche^ bhava e^tasmin kshe^mah ke^naanjasaa bhave^t. 
4. 22. 15. 

In their sermon to Prithu, the Sanakadis said, "Our lives should contain 
religious rituals, celibacy, non-violence and goodwill for all creatures. We 
should also experience the presence of the Lord in everything. ^i'idH«T cRfi 
'Jagataamatha tasthushaam cha ' - the Lord is seated in the hearts of all 
the creatures in creation. cin^fe TTfsfFT 'Tamave^hi sosmi' - you should also 
feel that the Lord is your true Self. 

Just think about the meaning of this attitude, that I am a servant of the Lord, 
and everyone else is His form. The meaning behind this is, "I see you as 
God, and you see me as God." Each sees the Lord in the heart of the other. 
The fact is that nothing exists, except God. People suffer because their 
minds are filled with different names, beliefs and desires. 
You have to understand that a samaadhi can achieve a state where the mind 
is free of all differences of name and form. However, samaadhi cannot erase 
the deep impression of the mind. These must be erased at source. 
And, to achieve this, one needs the guidance of a Sadguru*, who can make 
us understand the purport of the Vedas. It requires these factors, to make us 
understand how worthless our sanskaars* are. Beliefs are required to detach 
people from their worldly, misguided attachments. Sanskaaras are also a 
sadhan. The purpose of beliefs is not to create an inanimate, obstinate 
machine with a rigid mindset. Sanskaaras are to be given up once they have 
fulfilled their purpose of controlling wrong tendencies. The tattvagnan of the 
Paramatma is required to enable one to give up the sanskaaras." 
When the Sanakadis enlighted Prithu with these words, he and his wife 
adopted the Vanaprastha Ashrama*. 

A part of this story, which is found elsewhere, but not given in the Bhagwat, 
says that Prithu was amazed when he saw how beautiful the forest was. 
After accepting the Vanaprastha Ashrama, he and his wife left the palace 
and went into the forest to meditate. The forest was like a beautifully 
landscaped park, with a lake. He wondered who could have put in so much 



90 



work, to beautify the forest like this. His investigation revealed that it was 
Nishat, his elder brother, who had emerged from Vena's body before Prithu 
emerged. Nishat had worked quietly, to beautify the forest area in Prithu' s 
kingdom. He respected his younger brother, Prithu, so greatly, that he would 
secretly build dams on rivers, create lakes, and facilitate agriculture. Despite 
doing so much, he did not present himself before Prithu. 
Prithu found out where Nishat lived, and went to him. He embraced Nishat 
warmly, and said, "Brother Nishat, all the magnificence in my kingdom is 
due to your greatness. You did the work and I got the credit. My elder, 
Brother, you are truly great!" 

After that, Nishatraj served for the rest of their days. Then they went to the 
land of the Lord. 

King Prachinverhi was a descendent of Prithu, and was very fond of doing 
Yagyas. He undertook so many Yagyas that if the total quantity of the kusha 
grass (placed for the Yagya) were to be calculated, it would be enough to 
cover the surface of the entire Earth! 

King Prachinverhi had ten sons, who were called the Prachetas. When they 
asked Prachinverhi what he wanted them to do, he told them to expand the 
kingdom and increase the population. 

The Prachetagana* went to the Narayana sarovara*, where they heard some 
beautiful music, and were fascinated by the sound. The Lord Gaurishankar* 
manifested on a bull, before them. When the Prachetas had praised and 
worshipped the Lord Gaurishankar, they gave a mantra to the Prachetas - 

Jitam ta aatmaviddhurya svastaye " svastirastu me \ 
Bhavataa raadhasaa raaddham sarvasyaa aatmane " namah. 
4. 24. 33. 

The Lord Shankar told the Prachetas to chant this mantra, and also taught 
them a beautiful verse eulogizing the Lord Vishnu. The Prachetas went to 
the sea shore, where they worshipped the Lord Vishnu for several years. 
While the Prachetas were away, Naradji came to King Prachinverhi as he 
was busy with his Yagya, and asked what the King hoped to gain through 
the Yagyas. Prachinverhi replied that he was confused about what he should 
do for his salvation. His priests had told him that he should do Yagyas, 
which is why he kept undertaking this religious ritual, without knowing 
exactly what they would bring him. "I do not understand these matters. I 
only know this activity," he said. 



91 



"Please look up at the sky," said Naradji. 

Prachinvarhi looked up and beheld that the sky was full of ferocious 
animals, with weapons in their hands. He asked Naradji what this meant. 
Naradji told Prachinvarhi that these were the animals that had been 
sacrificed in his Yagyas, and were waiting to avenge themselves. 
One interpretation of sacrificial animals is the oppressed people who are 
forced to contribute towards a ritual. People suffer when they are made to 
contribute to the expenses of a Yagya. So, every undertaking should be 
carried out with consideration and justice. Shrimad Bhagwat is a Vaishnav 
Purana*, so the practice of animal sacrifice is criticized from the beginning 
to the end. 

Prachinvarhi was terrified. "What will happen to me?" he asked piteously. 
Naradji then narrated the Puranjanopakhkyana* to Prachinvarhi, explaining 
the fate of the average human. 

Naradji explained that the jeeva* and the Ishwara* are inseparable 
companions. Just as Shri Krishna and Arjuna, Rama and Laxmana, are 
always named together, the names of the jeeva and the Ishwara also go 
together. Because of their reputation of being inseparable, they are called 
'sakhaa'. If you know one, you will automatically remember the other. 
So, you have an anonymous friend who you do not know about. When the 
jeeva separated, he saw that there is a body, which is like a city. It has nine 
gates, and there is much scope for enjoyment. There are two openings for 
seeing the view outside, and for going out. There are two doorways for 
sounds to enter, two doorways for scents to enter, and one doorway for taste 
to enter through. 

You see, the hands and feet are blind. The sense organs provide the 
information and the organs of action respond accordingly. The five praanas* 
are a great shesha* which abides when the body dies. The praanas do not die 
until the jeeva attains Moksha. These five praanas guard the city of the body. 
Naradji gave the analogy of a city, to describe the human body in detail. He 
first described the jeeva as a man called Puranjana, wherein Puranj ana's 
description was paroksha*, and the description of the jeeva was aparoksha*. 
Had he described the subtle straightaway, Prachinvarhi would have lost 
interest in the story. 

Next he spoke of the intellect, as a woman called Pramada, who lived in the 
city of the physical body. The soul is bewitched by her, and gets so attached 
to her that it forgets the Lord. The intellect Pramada and the jeeva Puranjana 
fell deeply in love. When the intellect Pramada laughed, the jeeva Puranjana 
would also laugh. He considered her laughter, eating and movements, his 
own. He was totally infatuated with her. Ultimately, old age arrived in the 



92 



form of an enemy called Jara, with his host of diseases, and other 
troublesome enemies of the body. The pranas were badly defeated and left 
the body. Puranjana died thinking about Pramada, and as a result was born 
as a woman, becoming Pramada. 

It is mentioned in the Bhagwat, that all the men in the world were women in 
their previous births, and all the women we see, were men in their past lives. 
Each died thinking about someone of the opposite sex. That is how the 
world is, so there is no point in considering anyone higher or lower than any 
other. Superiority has noting to do with the sex of a person. It is not the 
name, religion, or sect which makes anyone superior or inferior, because the 
essence of everybody is the Paramatma. 

So, when the jeeva Puranjana became a woman, he got married, had children 
and descendents. When the husband of this woman (who was Puranjana) 
died, she went with the body to the river bank, weeping bitterly. Just then, 
the anonymous friend, Agyat Sakha* came and questioned her, saying, "My 
brother, who are you? You are not a woman, and nor is the dead man your 
husband. It is all the play of Maya. *rFTT ftaT w 'Maaya hye ^shaa mayaa 
srishtaa ' - it was I who organized this illusion. You had turned your back to 
Me, and gone towards the world, and got trapped in it. You are neither a 
woman nor a man. Both of us are swans - you and I, - *r 'aham cha 
tvam cha. ' 

You see, the intellect becomes so deluded that it considers the body to be 
'me', dark or fair, tall or short, etc. It says, T eat, when the sense organs eat, 
drink, or taste. It considers the mind's tendencies (to be happy or sad) to be 
its own. The intellect has trained the Atma to identify so thoroughly with it 
that it gets agitated by trifles. The Atma, however, is nitya*, shuddha*, 
buddha*, and mukta*." 

Hearing this clarification, the veil of Maya was removed, and the jeeva felt 
united with its constant companion, the Paramatma," 

Prachinvarhi asked Naradji, "What justice is it, that good and bad deeds are 
done by one body, but the rewards and punishments are given to another, 
future body? The body that did the deeds gets no result, but the body who 
didn't do the deeds is given the result. How fair is this?" 
Naradji explained that it is not the body who is the doer - it is the subtle 
body who decides what to do, and orders the organs of action. The jeeva is 
bound to the body until it understands that its identification with the body is 
adhyas*, a bhram*, and that its real nature is advitiya*, purna*, and one with 
the Paramatma. The only way a person can rise above the delusion of being 
a body is to keep the company of Mahatmas. 



93 



Tasminmahanmukharitaa madhubhichcharitrapeeyushashe^shasaritah 
paritah sravanti, 

Taa ye^ pibantyavitrisho nripa gaadhakarnaistaanna 

sprishantyashanatrbhayashokamohaah. 

4. 29. 40. 

"King, when you sit among Mahatmas, you will see that rivers of elixir flow 
from their mouths, in the form of descriptions of the Lord. These great souls 
first experience the nectar of the nature of the Lord, and have no need to talk 
about it to any. However, the essence of the Lord is of such sweetness that it 
cannot be contained, and forces even the reticent Mahatmas into speaking 
about Him. 

So, immerse your ears in the sweet rivers of the katha. Those who listen to 
this nectarine talk discover that their thirst continues to increase, no matter 
how much of this elixir they imbue through their ears. 

What is the essence of a Mahatma? The essence of a Mahatma is the 
personification of the thirst for Shri Krishna. This thirst fills his heart, and is 
never quenched. The Mahatmas never tire of hearing talks about the Lord. 
Those who get addicted to imbuing this elixir lose physical hunger and 
thirst. They do not fear the future, nor regret the past. Nor do they have any 
attachment for the present. 

So, satsang is the only way to escape from the worldly bonds of 'me' and 
'mine', which continue from generation to generation." 
Naradji's sermon had the effect of detaching Prachinvarhi from every 
worldly consideration. He stopped undertaking yagyas, and went into 
isolation to do bhajan*. His sons - the Prachetas - were already engaged in 
doing bhajan. 

One day, the Lord Vishnu manifested, seated on the Garuda, before the 
Prachetas. They were overwhelmed to see Him, and eulogized at length. The 
Lord said, "Prachetas, you are all filled with brotherly love. Anyone who 
thinks about you ten brothers will be granted lasting brotherly love. Now, 
leave this place, get married, and increase the population of the world. 
Prachetas, there is one thing more I wish to tell you. Daksha Prajapati, the 
son of Brahma, felt deeply ashamed to have been given a goat's head. He 
gave up his life in shame. He will now be born as your son Daksha. 
Remember that he is a Brahmin of past birth. He will increase the 
population, so take care of him and look after your kingdom." 



94 



When the Prachetas heard this sermon, they returned to their kingdom. They 
found no father, no organized rule, and no social arrangements of any kind. 
Priyavrata and Prachinvarhi had both been influenced by Naradji's talks, and 
had left, to worship the Lord in isolation. When Kings abandon their duty to 
protect and rule, and retreat to meditate, then the kingdom becomes like an 
ungoverned forest. 

The Prachetas succumbed to anger. They had received a mantra from 
Shankarji, had a vision of the Lord Vishnu, and done years of tapasya. Their 
spiritual power was so powerful that their anger turned into fire and the trees 
began to burn. Chandrama*, the devata of the trees, appeared. He is also the 
Devta of herbs and other plants - ^nts^TT^ si^mi TMT 'somosmaakam 
braahmanaanaam raajaa '. He provides them with liquid nourishment. So, 
Chandrama came to the Prachetas and said, "Look, my brothers, do not burn 
up the innocent trees. They all have life. Please don't destroy them. If you 
were to use them for a Yagya, for worship, or the good of the people, it was 
a different matter. Otherwise, they should not be destroyed. They have a 
daughter called Vaarshti. Please get married to her." 

The Prachetas accepted Chandrama' s suggestions and married Vaarshti. 
They had a son called Daksha. They became so engrossed in the affairs of 
the kingdom that they forgot Shankarji 's mantra, and also forgot the Lord 
Vishnu. Naradji came when they became totally enwrapped in luxuries and 
indulgences. "Look," he said, "the entire creation comes from the Lord, and 
is seen by His power. It contains nothing worthy of attachment or aversion. 
Just as the sun causes rain and also makes the water evaporate, the entire 
creation emerges from the Lord and dissolves in Him. You should feel 
neither love, nor hatred for any, and not get trapped by worldly attachments. 
A birth, or a task, is worthwhile only when it is in the service of the Lord, or 
for pleasing Him. Knowledge is worthwhile only when it serves to free us 
from worldly attachments." 

Tatkarma haritosham yat saa vidyaa yaa vimuktaye \ 

Naradji's teachings removed all the worldly attachments of the Prachetas. 
They began to see the Lord everywhere. As is glimpsed repeatedly in the 
Bhagwat, the association of Naradji achieved what the vision of Shankarji 
and Bhagwan Vishnu could not. 

Now, the fourth Skandha ends here. As mentioned earlier, it contains thirty 
one chapters. Seven describe Dharma, because Dharma contains seven 
strands. Five contain Artha, because the Lord is experienced through the five 



95 



sense organs. Eleven chapters describe Kama, because eleven organs (five 
sense organs, five organs of action, and the mind) are used to fulfill desires. 
Of the last eight chapters, four speak about the Nirguna tattva* and four 
about the Saguna tattva*. King Prachinvarhi developed devotion of the Lord 
by the knowledge of the Nirguna tattva, and the Prachetas attained liberation 
by the knowledge of the Saguna tattva. 

Now tomorrow you will hear about the characters of Rishabhdeva and 
Bharata. Some geography and astronomy will also be described. 

Om, Shantih! Shantih! Shantih! 



96 



BHAGAWATAMRIT 
Pravarchan V. 
(Skandha V & VI) 



The Shrimad Bhagwat Mahapurana adopts nine methods to make us 
understand the essence of the Lord. Where do all the different kind of beings 
and natural objects we see, come from, and where do they disappear? How 
are the Sun, Moon, stars and planets always kept in their places in the sky? 
What prevents them from clashing? Who is it, who gives succor, with grace 
and compassion, when our world is threatened? What is the factor which 
creates the variety of desires in different people, and what causes desires to 
change? How does the world progress with Time? What are the Lord's 
devotees like? How is the mind controlled? How is liberation attained? 
These nine topics are given as the method of learning, and knowing that it is 
the Lord who supports everything. 

Now, you enter the fifth Skandha. It describes the sthiti (condition or state), 
which also establishes the Paramatma. If you seek to find the Paramatma by 
means of sense organs or mantras, you will only obtain inanimate matter. If 
you seek Him using the intellect, you will find the essence of nihilism. If 
you use the method of shraddha, you will obtain Ishwara. The method of 
direct experience will establish the supreme, all-pervading, non-dual Atman. 
So, the Paramatma is attained in the manner suited to the kind of search 
undertaken. 

Listen to this once more: investigation through organs and instruments can 
only reveal inanimate matter. The dry intellect establishes a total void. 
Shraddha establishes Ishwara, and the seeker who uses the direct experience 
of his Atma, will find the irrefutable, non-dual Atman, the Brahman. 
Now, reflect upon the lives of human beings. There are two types of 
indriyas* in our body. One type is called the karmendriyas*, like the hands 
and feet. These indriyas are blind. The other kind are called gnanendriyas* - 
like the eyes, nose, tongue and ears. Thus, the human body is a mixture of 
sense and work organs. There is action as well as knowledge in people's 
lives. So, some sadhanas* are karma pradhan* and some sadhanas are gnan 
pradhan. Some are a mixture of both, some involve retreating from both, and 
some are to establish our Self as only an aloof witness. So, sadhanas are 



97 



graded in this way. A system is involved, which is known to enlightened 
people. 

The reason the fifth Skandha describes the sthiti, is that the essence of the 
Lord is everywhere, and everywhere there is only the essence of the Lord. 
No place exists, which is vacant of this essence. There are three kinds of 
sthitis. One is to establish our self in the Self. Another is to establish our self 
in a particular place, and the third is to establish out self in a particular 
period in Time. All three conditions require an effort for spiritual progress. 
Some achieve it by the Grace of God, some thorough devotional worship, 
and some through yoga*, and others achieve it through gnan. 
All these methods for spiritual progress are described in the fifth Skandha. It 
tells us how religious rituals can serve to obliterate the misdeeds of a past 
life. It explains how yoga can control the restlessness of the mind and the 
physical urges, how devoted worship can help us to overcome every kind of 
craving, and how surrender to the Lord can free us from the pride of great 
wealth and power. It also elaborates on how tattvagnan dispels the darkness 
of Avidya*. 

The fifth Skandha reveals also how a person gets mentally and emotionally 
affected by what he hears, and fully convinced about the superiority of 
something, and inferiority of something else. These are the factors which 
strengthen worldly bonds. It is impossible to rid ourselves of these false 
impressions without the association of Saints, or a Sadguru*, who explains 
the Knowledge (which is not derived from any human), and who establishes 
beyond any doubt, that the world is adhyarop*. If anyone thinks that they 
can reach this realization through their own effort, and deep desire, they are 
sadly mistaken. 

Priyavrat, the son of Swayambhuva Manu and Shatroopa, loved to associate 
with Saints, even as a child. He was quite young when he went off with 
Naradji, to worship the Lord at Naradji's ashram. His father, Swayambhuva 
Manu and grandfather Brahmaji, went to him and tried to explain that the 
Lord is not obtained by simply living in a forest, hut, or ashrama. A pure 
hearted person can obtain the Lord even as a householder, ruler, or Emperor. 
Priyavrata felt that Swayambhuva Manu may be saying all this out of 
fatherly affection and attachment. However, when Brahmaji reiterated what 
Manuji had said, he was convinced. He knew that Brahmaji 's four mouths 
spoke the four Vedas. The Vedas have not been given by any human being, 
nor by the Ishwara. The Vedas are Knowledge itself, and self manifested. 
The jeevas and the Ishwara are seen in the light of the Vedas. Priyavrata was 
convinced of the authenticity of Brahmaji 's words, and accepted their 
request to return. 



98 



After taking leave of Naradji, Priyavrata returned to his home. By God's 
grace, he had a long life and much power. He even tried to turn night into 
day, by using the wheels of his chariot to check the rays of the Sun. "The 
Lord had blessed us by making the divisions of night and day. Can't night be 
eliminated by His grace?" he reasoned. 

Now, apart from the Lord Shri Krishna, the primary teacher of nishkaam 
karma* is the Sun. If you wish to see the greatest nishkaam karma yogi*, 
you can see the Sun. He does not rest for even one moment. He spreads light 
to all, gets attached to none, and continues to work without any expectation 
from anybody. He does not use words to teach people what karma yoga* is; 
he teaches us through his actions. He is a true disciple of the Lord Shri 
Krishna. The Lord has said, in the Gita, 

faciei y|ctdc|H£Hoi|i|H I 
Imam vivasvate " yogam proktavaanahamavyayam. 

The mantra of the Rig Veda, ^nfer WR^fT ^fer^to 'svasti 
panthaamanuchare^ma sooryaachnadramasaaviva' - means that the Sun 
always moves ahead on his path, is steadfast on his pattern of right behavior, 
and provides benefits to all. 

Priyavrata tried to follow the path of the Sun. The pressure of his chariot's 
wheels upon the earth caused precious gems to emerge. The ocean was filled 
with seven kinds of flavors, and given its boundaries. Priyavrata divided the 
earth, and ruled over it for a long period of time. 

Later, the innate detachment in Priyavrata surfaced. He left everything and 
returned to Naradji 's ashram. He spent his last days there, worshipping the 
Lord who abides in all hearts, singing devotional songs, meditating, and 
thinking constantly about the Lord. Priyavrata has no parallel in history 
when it comes to a life of power, achievement, karma, gnan and total 
detachment. 

Priyavrata had a son called Agnighra. Brahmaji sent an apasara* from his 
own land, to entertain him. Agnighra was bewitched as soon as he saw her. 
He fell deeply in love with her and had many children by her. One of them 
was Nabhi*. 

Agnighra, being attached to the apsaraa, had to spend some time in the land 
of apsaraas, before he attained liberation. He was liberated only when he 
finally became totally detached. 

Agnighra' s son, Nabhi, was the personification of Dharma. Priyavrata' s life 
had been full of both Dharma and power. His son, Agnrighra inherited the 



99 



power, and his grandson, Nabhi, inherited the Dharma. All of them received 
the grace of the Lord and were blessed by Him. 

It is not as though the Lord graces only those who have great qualities. We 
tend to consider ourselves superior, and many other inferior, but such an 
attitude is nothing but our vanity, and is totally unjustified. As far as 
intelligence is concerned, even animals and birds have intelligence. 
Everybody has intelligence, and every creature believes in what they 
consider to be right. 

Nabhi had faith in Dharma. He asked the Brahmins to undertake a grand 
Yagya. Since the Yagya was carried out with perfect adherence to the 
Vedas, the Lord Himself manifested at its conclusion. Nabhi praised the 
Lord, saying, "Lord, You have granted me the greatest blessing by coming. 
A person is blessed even by remembering You when he sneezes, or slips and 
falls." 

The Brahmins praised the Lord, and said, "Lord, You always uphold the 
words of Brahmins. You respect the Brahmins who know the Vedas, live 
righteous lives, do Yagyas, and use their lives and activities for serving You. 
Your coming today, is because of these reasons. It is our desire that the wish 
of our King, Nabhi, be fulfilled, and he gets a son like You." 
The Lord said, "Brahmins, words spoken by righteous and learned Brahmins 
like you always come true. I, Myself, will come as the son of your King." 
Just see the generosity of our Lord! He fulfills every desire, whether it is for 
power and luxury, for a good son, or for wealth; and as for Moksha - that is 
the nature of the Lord! So, He kept His pledge, and manifested as Nabhi's 
son, who was named Rishabhdeva. Rishabhdeva was the personification of a 
liberated soul. One, whose beauty shines in the form of Knowledge, is called 
'Rishabh' - w^T ^nfrT ^fcT ^nr: 'rishe ^na gnane ^na bhaati iti rishabha '. 
Nabhi went off to do bhajan when the Lord came as his son. They say that 
Indra* stopped rain, when Rishabhdeva was a child. He wanted to know 
whether it indeed was the Lord who had manifested as Rishabhdeva. The 
Lord is He, who - ^ 3T^Mk| 'kartum akartum any athaakar turn 
samartha ' - one who has the power to do, to not do, or change anything, 
without its affecting His greatness in any way. 

There is a folk tale about this episode, which says that Indra wanted his 
daughter, Jayanti, to get married to Rishabhdeva. He wanted to make sure of 
the qualities of the groom, incase he chose an unworthy man. So, he wanted 
to test Rishabhdeva before placing the proposal. 

We often hear the phrase - 3^crat ^ fl%uft 'ashtaa varshaa 

bhave^d gauri navavarshaa cha rohinee' - but we also need to remember 



100 



what is written in the Manusmriti*. It is written there, that it is better that a 
girl remains in her father's house, even after becoming a mature woman, 
rather than that she is made to marry a man lacking in good qualities. 
So, Indra's thinking, regarding his daughter's future was absolutely 
appropriate. According to the Dharma shastras*, a daughter should be 
married only after the bridegroom's qualities have been well tested. Since 
Rishabhdeva was the Lord Himself, He knew what was in Indra's mind, and 
created rain effortlessly, merely through desiring it. 

Indra was impressed and overjoyed. He got his daughter married to 
Rishabhdeva. Many great kings were born in their lineage, and also, many 
highly qualified Brahmins. On the one side, the Navayogeshwaras were 
born, and King Bharata was born on the other side. Bharata ruled the seven 
continents of the earth. The significance of these details is that 
Rishabhdeva' s sons had the capacity for excellent administration, adhered to 
religious attitudes, managed the economy, and remained emotionally 
unattached to the world. The Lord had many sons, all with great characters. 
Rishabhdeva had grown up in the laps of learned people, and educated by 
those well versed in the Vedas. He did not restrict his son's education to 
learned tutors, but taught them himself. He did not educate them privately; 
his lessons were held in public. He arranged for his people to receive the 
same kind of education as his sons, because he had equal affection for both. 
The fact is, that there is no difference, because in the Sanskrit language, the 
putra* is called the prajaa* and the prajaa, the putra. So, Rishabhdeva 
considered his people his sons. He gave his hundred sons the same sermon 
as his people - 

Naayam de^ho de^habhaajaam nriloke^ kashtaan kaamaanarhate^ 
vidbhujaam ye \ 

Tapo divyam putrakaa ye ^na sattvam shuddhye ^dyasmaad brahmasaukhyam 

tvanantam. 

5.5.1. 

"My dear little children listen attentively to what I say. This body is not 
given to us to waste in fulfilling petty desires. Physical pleasures are 
obtained even by the worms in the faeces, and they are quite happy to be 
where they are. If - despite having received a human birth, in this land of 
Bharatvarsha* - you have only the same petty pleasures, then what have you 
actually achieved? Your Motherland is not a bhog bhoomi*; it is a Dharma 



101 



bhoomi*. Here, we must control our sense organs and indulge within the 
limits of what is ethical. A person who lacks maryada* and self control, is 
not worthy of being called a human." 

Preetirna yaavanmayi vaasude \e " na muchyate " de ^hayoge ^na taavat. 5. 5. 6 

In his sermon, Rishabhdeva told everybody that unless and until a love for 
the Lord, who abides in the hearts of all, is developed, nobody can become 
free of the attachment with the body, and nor can one obtain liberation. A 
true Guru, Father, or Mother, is the one who frees us from the noose of 
death, and teaches us how to cultivate a deep love for the feet of the Lord 
Vasudeva*. 

The word Vasudeva is split into two parts: Vasu + deva. cRifcT ith °trj: ' Vasati 
iti vaasuh ' - the one who lives in the hearts of all creatures is called vasu; 
and qlc^iiri sh^m^icI ^rT ^r: "deevyati prakaashate " iti de \ah ' - the one who 
remains unchanged in all the sad*- chid* akritees*, vikritis*, prakritiyon*, 
and sanskritiyon*, is called 'deva'. When the meaning of both is combined, 
the person having all these qualities is called Vasudeva. 
After the Lord Rishabhdeva had given advice and instructions to all, he 
divided their responsibilities for work and worship. He crowned his eldest 
son, Bharata, and accepted the status of a wandering monk, in order to show 
what kind of a life a monk should lead, and to encourage people towards 
asceticism. 

The life of an avadhoota* has no room for any type of narrow, social rigidity 
or restrictions. Rishabhdeva freed himself of all orthodox stipulations, and 
displayed a magnanimous, holistic attitude. 

It is said that eight siddhis* came into Rishabhdeva' s life. These included 
the ability to go anywhere at will, fly in the sky, obtain any desired object, 
etc. Rishabhdeva rejected them all. 

Raja Parikshit now asked whether it would have harmed Rishabhdeva in any 
way, had he accepted the siddhis. Shukadevji replied: 

Na kuryaatkarhichitsakhyam manasi hyanavasthite \ 
Yadvishrambhaachchiraachcheerna chaskanda tapa e ^shvaram. 
5.6.3. 



102 



"King, the mind is very fickle - one should never consider it to be a true 
friend. The Lord Shankar was confident of his mind, and so were many 
yogis. As a result, their hard earned tapa* was destroyed. People who claim 
to have overcome desire, anger and greed, are deluded. Just as we can never 
trust a cheat, in the same way we should never trust what the mind tells us, 
because the mind is as untrustworthy as a cheat. 

Rishabhdeva lead such a life that no one needed to do even his last rites. A 
person whose body is burnt by gnagani* is no longer suited for routine last 
rites. The forest in which Rishabhdeva used to wander, caught fire and 
began to burn, but Rishabhdeva did not leave it. He placed a stone in his 
mouth, as though there was nothing further for him to say or do, eat or drink, 
pray or meditate. This liberated man was thus liberated in every sense of the 
word. 

When Bharata ascended to the throne, an atmosphere of piety spread over 
the entire kingdom. The country - called 'Ajanaabha' all this time - was 
given the name of 'Bharatvarsha', since Bharata became King. The son of 
Shakuntala and Dusyanta, with the same name, came much later. Our 
country is not named after the later Bharata - it is named after the son of 
Rishabhdeva, who lived much before the other Bharata was born. 
Peace reigned in the land for as long as Bharata ruled. There was no fear of 
thieves, or any other kind of danger. The people were free of all major 
problems. They lived in peace and security, and King Bharata undertook 
Yagya after Yagya. 

A question arises, regarding the fruits of the fire ritual. Logically, the fruit of 
the Yagya should be given to the person who undertakes it, and pours 
oblations into the fire. However, the fruit of the Yagya is given to Indra, and 
not to the yajamaan* who does the havan*. Why is that? 
The explanation given in the Shrimad Bhagwat is that the jeeva has acquired 
a false vanity, thinking that it is he who is making the offering in the Yagya. 
The fact is that a person can offer oblations only when inspired by the Lord 
to do so, and only then can Indra receive the oblation. There is no body who 
is doing the ritual, and no Indra who enjoys the results. It is the one Lord, 
seated in the hearts of both, who prompts one to raise his hand and pour 
rarified butter into the fire, and prompts the other to receive it. The giver and 
the taker, the donor and the receiver, are not two - it is only the Paramatma 
seen as both. 

King Bharata understood this subtle truth, so all his Yagyas were undertaken 
with a feeling of equanimity and divinity. His Yagyas are described thus, in 
the Bhagwat. 



103 



Bharata ultimately handed over the Crown to his son, and went into the 
forest. He settled on the banks of the Gandaki River, taking routine baths in 
it, and passing his days in rituals of worship and meditation. 
Now we see the quirks of fate. Bharata grew deeply attached to a baby deer. 
He saw that its mother died after giving birth, and feared that the little deer 
would fall into the river and drown. His heart was filled with a pure 
compassion. He kept the deer with him and brought it up lovingly. 
The Gunas* are such that they turn sattvaguna* into rajoguna* and the 
rajoguna into tamoguna* very fast. If you bring a leper into your house, feed 
him and arrange for his treatment, it is a sattvic* act. If, however, this 
kindness results in the development of vanity - that you are so noble - than, 
it makes you fall prey to attachment and aversion, love and disdain, and will 
lead to your downfall. 

Bharata grew proud that he had saved and brought up the little deer. The 
sattvic compassion turned into a rajasic* conceit. Bharata tied himself to the 
deer with bonds of attachment. He meant to merely show compassion, but 
became completely preoccupied with the deer. 

One day, the deer ran off to join his own herd. No two creatures can always 
be of the same mind. Two minds meet for a while, and then go their own 
way. People walk together for a while, meet at a well, but the innate 
differences in their natures, upbringing, and circumstances ensure an 
inevitable change of priorities. 

Bharata was very unhappy when the deer left him. He missed the deer 
terribly, and the deer occupied his mind even when his spirit left his body. 
As per - 3^?f TrfrT: "*TT T f^\: 'ante " matih saa gatih*' - Bharata became a deer in 
his next life. This episode teaches us to keep our hearts pure, and never get 
attached to anything in this world. 

Worship of the Lord, however, is never wasted, and nor was the life of King 
Bharata a total waste. His successive births as a deer and then as Jada 
Bharata* were not wasted either. In fact, it could be said that two important 
truths were revealed through these three births. The first truth is that a 
person should never become attached to anything worldly. The second truth 
is that a person who worships the Lord may slip and fall, may have to be 
born as an animal or bird, but his devotion for the Lord will be retained, 
regardless of the body he acquires. Love for the Lord has its own obvious 
effect. King Bharata had love for the Lord and he retained this even as a 
deer. 

When he died as a deer, King Bharata was born as Jada Bharata, the son of a 
Brahmin. He was ill-treated by his step mother and step brothers. His father 



104 



tried to educate him, and organized his thread ceremony, but Jada Bharata 
failed to learn the Gayatri Mantra by heart even after years of practice! 
Jada Bharata began to lead a life which was in keeping with his name and 
qualities. He could not accomplish even the simplest of tasks given to him. 
He did not seem to notice when the ground was uneven, or whose animals 
grazed in whose fields. He was content with whatever he got, at times filling 
his stomach with even rotten food, and sleeping in the open fields. 
Established in his Self, Jada Bharata was untroubled by external factors. 
This was surely the result of the tattvagnan and worship of his past life. 
One day, some dacoits caught hold of Jada Bharata. The animal they had 
planned to sacrifice to the Goddess Kali, had somehow got loose and ran off. 
The dacoits decided to sacrifice Jada Bharata instead. They gave him the 
ritual bath, and fed him well. They garlanded him and put sandal paste, in 
preparation of the sacrifice. When they took Jada Bharata to the Goddess 
Kali, She saw that they had proposed to kill a Mahatma who had tattvagnan* 
and sammatva*. How could She allow such a great person to be sacrificed to 
Her? She snatched the sword from the dacoit, and cut off all their heads. 
Then She began juggling the severed heads in a rage. 

The Shrimad Bhagwat implies that this is the fate of whoever misbehaves 
with a Mahatma. The Ramcharitmanas says the same. The statements of 
both are given below: 

^ 3^TT W %TT I ^ft WR I I 

+ + + + + 

E\ame\a khalu mahadabhichaaraatikramah kaatsnye^naatmane falati. 
5.9.19. 

+ + + + + 

Saadhu avagyaa kara fala aisaa, 
Jare " nagar anaatha kara jaisaa 
Ramcharitmanas. 

And 

Jo aparaadha bhagatakara karaeei, 



105 



Raama rosha paavaka so jarayee. 
Ramchiritmanas. 

Jada Bharata had achieved such a lofty state that he felt no anger for the 
dacoits. He was not elated when they honored him and fed him, and he felt 
no fear when they were about to kill him. He was equally indifferent to 
respect and insult, life and death, or whatever came to him. He knew that an 
earthen pot is made and broken, but the essence of the earth remains 
unchanged. It makes no difference to the Atma, whether the body is dead or 
alive. Nothing disturbed Jada Bharata' s equanimity. 

Now, the episode of the King of Sindhu Saubhari, called Rahugana, enters 
the story. The Puranas* narrate this story by saying that the deer which had 
been saved by King Bharata, was fated to have hundreds of births. As a 
result of satsang, however, he was absolved of the rest of his births and had 
to be born only once, as King Rahugana. 

King Rahugana was very fond of satsang, because the impressions of 
previous lives always leave their influences. There is an important text, 
called the 'Charak', which is a part of the Ayurveda*. It gives details about 
how a baby in the womb is affected by good and bad tendencies. The 
tendencies of the parents, and both the parents of the parents, affect the 
unborn baby. He is also affected by the impressions of his own past lives, 
and the food taken by his mother. 

The influence of King Rahugana' s past life was so strong that he did not 
enjoy any company other than that of the Mahatmas. Indeed, who else can 
bestow the kind of pure love which the Mahatmas give? Who is there, in this 
world, who can truthfully tell another his every secret? Worldly interaction 
requires a certain amount of deceit. There is nobody one can fully bare one's 
heart to. No matter how close any two persons may be, there has to be some 
reservation, at some stage in their relationship and interaction. So, those who 
dislike any kind of artificiality always prefer to associate with satpurush*, 
and obtain satsang. 

King Rahugana was going to obtain the satsang of Kapildevji. One of the 
kahaars* was suddenly taken ill. The others set out in search of a 
replacement, and met Jada Bharata. Being a hefty and carefree man, he went 
along, and was told to hold one of the four poles of the palanquin. Since Jada 
Bharata had never done this work before, he could not walk in rhythm with 
the others, and kept walking out of step. 

King Rahugana was jolted repeatedly, and kept scolding the palanquin 
bearers. Ultimately, the others told him that it was because Jada Bharata' s 
uneven gait that the palanquin did not move smoothly. 



106 



King Rahugana taunted Jada Bharata angrily, asking whether he was too 
hungry to walk properly. "Your body is quite hefty - why can't you walk 
properly? I will have to teach you a lesson if you don't stop jolting me", he 
warned. 

Jada Bharata began to smile when he heard these words. He said, "You see, 
King, this body is a clod of earth, created from the five elements. No learned 
person mistakes it for the Atma. This body did not exist in the past; it will 
not exist in the future, and it is mine at present. If the palanquin rested on my 
shoulder, then I would be a suitable candidate for you to teach a lesson to. 
So, what are you trying to teach me?" 

King Rahugana jumped down from the palanquin as soon as he heard Jada 
Bharata' s words. He fell at his feet and asked Jada Bharata, "Sir, who are 
you? You speak like one who knows all the Vedas and the shastras. Your 
words are so true - the Atma is separate from the body, and this body cannot 
be called the Atma. Who are you, who speak such profound truths? 
Look, I fear nothing; not the thunderbolt of Indra, nor the trishul* of 
Shankara, and not even the scepter of Yama*. My only fear is that I may 
misbehave with a Mahatma." 

The King Rahugana asked, with even greater humility, "Sir, how do you say 
that there is no weight on you? I concede that you are not the body, but if a 
vessel is placed on a fire, it gets heated, and after it is heated, the water 
inside the vessel is heated, and only after that does the rice inside get 
cooked. So, when the Atma is seated in your body, how can it not experience 
the weight which falls on the body? It is natural to feel the weight. Then, 
how is it that you do not experience the weight of the palanquin?" 
The Mahatma Jada Bharata replied, "You see, King, this is the earth. It 
seems as though a man is walking on it, but the foot of the man who walks 
on the clay, is also made of clay. The knees are above the feet, the waist is 
above the knees, and the shoulders are above the waist. A palanquin is 
placed on the shoulder, and a man is seated in the palanquin. All of this is 
clay. The one who is all dressed up and says, 'I am the King, the ruler', is 
also clay. Clay, in the form of the palanquin, clay in the form of the bearers, 
and clay in the form of the one seated on top. When all this is a variation of 
clay, why do you call yourself a King. It is possible that tomorrow you may 
be defeated by me, and I win over you. Then I will be in the palanquin, and 
you will carry the palanquin on your shoulder. What is this worldly farce 
about who is the King, and who are the subjects, and who is a load to 
whom? Despite all this, King, I am prepared to do what you say." 
After this, an excellent discussion ensued. Jada Bharata clarified to King 
Rahugana, that the world can not be created out of particles, because 



107 



particles are shapeless and coincidental. One cannot experience particles. 
3#reF7T ^#7?TR?r 'Avidyayaa manasaa kalpitaaste " '. Ignorance compels 
us to first imagine independent particles, then groups of particles, in order to 
understand the essence of this creation. The world cannot be created by 
Prakriti*, because Prakriti can not have the qualities of being consequential, 
and transient, as well as eternal. So, the pure knowledge about the nature of 
the Brahman is the real tattva*, and nothing else is worth bothering about. 
Things change as soon as we define them. When we begin to define the 
changed forms, they change yet again. They lack sustainability; they have no 
permanent state. So, dismiss them as mithyaa*. 

The word mithyaa is used here, to indicate that a mental or verbal definition 
of the world is not possible. The feeling that it is real - or unreal - is 
experienced by the witness which is its adhishtaan*, and it is poorna*. The 
God who supports this world of name and form is complete. The witness 
who illumines it is the chetan*. If it were not one with the chinmatra satta*, 
it would have been transient; and if the reality was not one with the 
awareness, it would be inanimate. So, to establish non-duality, it is essential 
to accept that the adhishtaan and the self-illuminating awareness are one and 
the same. 

This entire episode is given in order to explain the cause of this sthiti. Sthiti 
comes not only by the Grace of God, but by the Grace of the Sadguru as 
well. It can come because of good deeds like Yagyas, or by worship, or by 
knowledge. All these sthitis are created by the Lord. Later on came many 
great Kings like Gaya, who are described in the Bhagwat. 
Now, the Shrimad Bhagwat' s fifth chapter sees King Parikshit questioning 
Shri Shukadevji Maharaj about the geographical conditions. It is made 
absolutely clear that all the descriptions given, of the islands, countries and 
continents, are not for the purpose of geographical or historical research. 
They are given to facilitate the ability to see God everywhere, and in all 
forms. All these descriptions establish that everything - from the inanimate 
and animate, from a wisp of grass right up to Prakriti, and from an earth 
worm to the Hiranyagarbha* - is nothing but the form of the Lord. 
Meditating upon the descriptions of the Lord removes the last vestige of 
attachments and aversions. 

All the apparent differences around us - the difference between man and 
woman, between religious sects, between Indian and non-Indian, between 
the Vedic* and other philosophies, between the Shaivas* and the Shaktas*, 
etc. etc., - are not real differences. They are hammers which shatter our 
hearts. Mental fragmentation cuts into our heart. So, the geographical and 



108 



astronomical descriptions have the specific purpose of mending our heart 
and making it whole again. 

Notwithstanding all this, I describe a little, in the form of a sample. As per 
the Shrimad Bhagwat, the Earth has seven continents, each double the size 
of the previous one. It is the same with the oceans which surround them. 
Considered impartially, the Bharatvarsha is not just the area between Kanya 
Kumari and the Himalayas. What is the meaning of the area called the 
Jambudveep? This word comes from the root 'jamb', which means that 
Jambudveep is a place where the people born in it, are un-perverted and 
obtain great good fortune. A grammatical analysis indicates that any person 
born here, is spiritually successful. Jambudveep is surrounded by a salty sea. 
It contains many States and islands. As per the description, all the surface 
land on Earth, is called Bharatvarsha, and is a karma kshetra*. Every human 
born on this Earth should work. Within the Bharatvarsha, the area from 
Kanya Kumari to the Himalayas, is called the Bharat Khanda, as is said 
when one takes a sankalpa*: 

^|p[ft qRcTcft *Kd^ 

'Jambu dveepe " bhaarat varshe " bhaarat khande " '. 

So, all the land in the world comes within the Jambudveep. In the lands 
beyond the Bharatvarsha or Bharat Khanda, people have long lives of great 
indulgence. They have great developments and luxury. However, even the 
Devtas long to be born in our Bharat Khanda, because the very earth here is 
holy. All the impurities of the land were washed away into the salty sea, and 
the land is now ideally suited for bhajan. 

It is in this land that the Ganga descended from the feet of the Lord. In the 
nine lands of Jambudveep, the sakaar* Lord is worshipped - as Matsya*, 
Kachap*, Narasimha* and as Nara-Narayana* only in the area called 
Bharatavarsha. This is its specialty, because only here is the Lord 
worshipped as having a form. In other parts of the world, the Lord is 
worshipped in the form of the elements, as the Goddess Earth, as the Lord of 
the Seas, Wind, or Sky. Nowhere else do people worship an image of the 
Lord with form. 

Astronomy is described next. The purpose of this description is also to 
impress upon us, the grandeur of the Paramatma who controls all the 
wonderful planets, and stars, and suns, and moons, in the universe. Our mind 
gets purified as we ponder upon these factors. 

The Lord Shesha* is described next. Parikshit placed another question, after 
hearing the description of the Shesha. "What is naraka?" he asked. "Is it a 



109 



land away from the earth, or is it a land on this earth/" It is worth paying 
attention to the reply given by Shri Shukadevji Maharaj. He did not define 
naraka or swarga* as being specific lands. He said only that naraka and 
swarga are obtained according to our actions. A person who has done good 
deeds experiences the joys of swarga, and the person who has sinned, 
experiences the suffering of hell. Naraka and swarga are created with the 
specific purpose of giving the results of the actions of people. Both are direct 
results of the individual's actions. They cannot be called 'de^shaanter'* - 
they should be considered 'falaanter'*. An experience of naraka is 
inevitable for anyone who indulges in 'paapa '*, so one must always strive 
to avoid doing anything bad. 

A number of factors are involved here. One is that the body is not the Atma. 
There is a jeeva which goes to different lands, according to his actions and 
desires. It is also born in different bodies. Different lands can also mean 
different sights or different points of view. Our actions bring us remorse, 
peace, or bliss. They are the fruits of Dharma, but the result of bad karma is 
also unavoidable. 

Many terrible hells are described, where sinners are torn apart, pecked by 
birds of prey, and thrown into cauldrons of boiling oil. These narratives are 
given so that people reflect upon the consequences of their actions. 
"In that case, everybody will have to go to hell, to suffer for their misdeeds," 
commented Parikshit. "Please tell us how we may save ourselves." 
The sixth Skandha starts with the answer to this question. It contains twenty 
nine chapters. Three describe the names of the Lord, fourteen describe the 
beauty and worship, and two give details about ritual worship. It describes 
how the Grace of God lifts up the worst sinners. That is why the 
methodology of the Shrimad Bhagwat calls the sixth Skandha the 'Pushti'* 
- T Tf^T cT^I^T 'poshanam tadanugraham '. When a tree is planted in a garden, 
it is periodically watered, given fertilizers, and pruned. The gardener does 
whatever is needed, to make the tree healthy and beautiful. The world is like 
a garden, and although people see the Lord's garden, they fail to see the 
gardener who created it - 

Aaraamamasya pashyatnti tanna pashyati kashchana. 
What is the world? An everlasting poem, eternally youthful. 

Pashya de \ashya kaavyam na mamaara na jeeryati. 



110 



Whenever feelings begin to dry up, the Lord nourishes us with a shower of 
Grace. A jeeva dries up when people do things which cause pain to others, 
and belittle themselves. The Lord never causes anybody's downfall. It is we 
who create our own regrets and shame. When the jeeva reaches a state from 
which he is unable to rise, then the Lord goes there, like a good gardener, 
and lifts him up with Grace. 

There is nobody on earth who does not commit some sin or wrong action. 
Nobody can be totally free of such mistakes. Those who claim that they have 
never done anything wrong are either childishly simple, or they wish to 
deceive others, because we all err at some point. 

The question is, how do we atone for our mistakes? The answer is that small 
mistakes need small prayaschits*, and the more serious sins require bigger 
forms of atonement. A fresh wound is raw, but an old wound is dry and 
hard. Some wounds are surface scratches, and some are deep gashes. We 
must understand the seriousness before we decide upon the remedy. None of 
us can be aware of all the wrongs done by us. Apart from the Lord, no one 
even knows the proper definition of 'paapa' and 'punya'. The Lord is the 
only one who knows every good and bad act done by every person since 
time immemorial, and also what should be given as the consequence. 
We often regret things we do, but continue to repeat them. The atonement 
then becomes as futile as an elephant's bath. Elephants use their trunks to 
pick up sand, and spray it all over themselves, as soon as they have finished 
bathing. 

The syllable 'praya' (in prayashchit) indicates paapa, and 'chit' indicates 
cleansing. But, how do we cleanse a sin? Should we do tapasya*, 
chadrayana vrat*, Ganga snaan*, or japa*? It is a fact that all these will help 
to cleanse the body and absolve us of a particular sin, but it will not cleanse 
the heart from where the sin emerged originally. The source of the desire 
which caused us to sin, will not be purified - ^ f^T 'naadharmajam 
tad hridayam'. As soon as any of the temptations appear, which lead us 
towards lust, anger or greed, they will overcome our minds. Kama*, krodha* 
and lobha* are in our hearts, and are gateways to hell. 

ftM H<<WH STt HI^HHIcHfl: I 

Trividham narakasye ^dam dvaaram naashanamaatmanhah. 

No external factor can succeed in cleansing the heart. So, seek the means 
within yourself. The one who is seated within, is the purest of the pure. So 
bring Him, who is already there, into your conscious awareness, and start to 



111 



serve all, with the feeling of serving Him. This will definitely purify your 
heart. 

The Lord is the one who uplifts the fallen, purifies the impure, and raises the 
lowly. He also liberates those who are headed for hell. This is the Godliness 
of God. The greatest purity is, therefore, that our lives be filled with Bhakti. 
The episode of Ajamil* is used to emphasize upon the effect of 
remembering, hearing, or singing the name of the Lord. Ajamil was a 
learned Brahmin, who lived an exemplary life. Unfortunately, he fell into 
bad company, picked up bad habits, and a prostitute into the house. He did 
all the patit* karmas. Patit karmas are when the sense organs are allowed to 
indulge indiscriminately, and the person becomes depraved. Even at the age 
of eighty, Ajamil continued to lead a sinful life, habitually imprisoning 
people, and gambling, cheating, killing and abducting people. 
It so happened that at the moment of his death, Ajamil called out to his 
youngest son, Narayana, to whom he was greatly attached. Every wicked 
person fears death, because he knows that his misdeeds will take him to hell. 
A paapi lacks atmabal*. The memories of his misdeeds crowd him and he 
feels frightened. His mind becomes the possession of Yamaraj*. He gets a 
glimpse of the Yamaraj 's vehicle, the fearsome bull buffalo. He sees the 
dark Yamadutas*, with fearsome beards and moustaches. Ajamil started to 
tremble with fear, when he saw these sights, and called out, "Narayana! Oh, 
Narayana - come to me." 

Narayana is the name of the Lord, and His attendants appeared as soon as 
Ajamil uttered this name. They cut off the noose the Yamadutas had put 
round Ajamil' s neck, and pushed them away. The Yamadutas asked, "Who 
are you? What do you think you are doing? We are the men of Yamaraj, and 
have come to take this paapi* to the court, where Yamaraj will judge him." 
Ajamil could see and hear the two groups discussing around him. The 
Yamadutas said, 'What did he do, except call out to his son?" The Lord's 
men replied, "We concede that he called out to his son, but, since when has 
his son had this name? His son is just ten years old, so he has had this name 
for the past decade. Our Master, however, has this name since Time began, 
so the name belongs to Him, not to Ajamil' s son. Our Master has the right 
over Ajamil, not yours. As men of Yamaraj, please tell us the definition of 
papa and punya. Who goes to narak and who goes to swarga? Does every 
creature have to go to hell?" 

Challenged thus, the Yamadutas began to give their definitions of Dharma. 
Their arguments were akin to those of the Smart* group, based on the 
Dharma Shastras*. They said that every body houses some witnesses, who 
keep watch on everything done by the individual. They expose the details 



112 



when the jeeva is taken to Yamaraj, and the jeeva receives appropriate 
punishment. The punishment is not given with any desire to inflict pain; it is 
given with the intention of cleansing the anatahkaran*. Just as a vessel is 
scrubbed and rinsed thoroughly, the jeeva is sent to Yamaraj 's hell, for 
purification. When he is cleansed, he is ready for the next birth and future 
lives. 

The Lord's men told the Yamadutas that all they had said was in keeping 
with the Smart Dharma. "You do not know the Bhagavadiya* Dharma. The 
Dharma of the Lord does not depend upon the jeeva - it works according to 
the Lord's Grace." 

Even in this context, I give an example, which may not be palatable to some. 
However, tell me - what sadhana* did Kubja do in her previous life? Did 
she belong to a higher cast, or was her work very holy, or were her 
aspirations very lofty? She was on her way to massage the wicked Kansa. 
She was physically deformed, and still the Lord accepted her. Did He accept 
her because of her sadhana? My dear, the one who comes to give Grace, 
cannot help but shower Grace! 

So, as the form of the Lord contains Grace - and does not bother about who 
deserves it, showering Grace upon even the likes of Kubja and Putana - so 
also the name of the Lord is Grace incarnate. The same qualities, the same 
nature, and the very same Dharma which are in His form, are also in His 
name. Blessings are not handed out in keeping with the receiver's actions; 
they are showered in keeping with the nature of the bestower. This is the 
Dharma of the Bhagwat, and the Lord Himself undertakes this anushthaan* 
for the benefit of all creatures. The Lord does not count the rotis* he gives - 
He just showers so many that a person has no need to ask for any in future 
lives. 

Jehijaachata jaachakataa jarijaaya jo jaaratijora jahaanahi re\ 

The Lord's men explained, "You see, Yamadutas, the Lord loves His own 
name dearly. Whenever this name is spoken, it is the power of the name 
which works, not the background of the person who speaks it. Ajamil took 
the Lord's name at the moment of his death - his intention may have been to 
call his son - but the fact that he took the Lord's name resulted in his 
atoning for millions of past mistakes. Had the Lord not chosen him and 
decided that Ajamil should take His name at that moment, then it would not 
have been possible for Ajamil to do so. One form of the lord is called 
'mugdha'*. He goes crazy when He hears anyone take His name, and 



113 



embraces that person without bothering to see what that person is like. This 
is one of the Lord's compassionate qualities. If the Lord only meted out 
justice, how would the Bhakti sampradaya* continue to flourish? The 
devotees thrive on the Lord's partiality and Grace. He Graces even the 
fallen, helpless and depraved. The name of the Lord destroys all our sins, 
regardless of the reason for its utterance. 

Well, let us accept that all sins are destroyed when the Lord's name is 
spoken. What comes next? Does one sin again, before one dies? If you say 
that you will sin again before you die, then all the sins which have been 
destroyed will spring to life again. Then how will any person be saved? It is 
not always possible that we are able to take the name of the Lord at the 
moment of death, since we often lose control of our thoughts and organs. So, 
what can one do? 

The answer to this question is that the name of the Lord should be spoken till 
the last possible moment. If no sin is committed in between the time the 
name is spoken and the person dies, it is considered that he took the name at 
the time of death. Our scriptures say that if someone gives an order which is 
impossible to carry out, that order is not to be followed. So, how can anyone 
be told that they must take the name of the Lord when they lack the capacity 
to do so?" 

The Yamadutas had no reply for all these points. They left Ajamil and went 
to Yamaloka*. Ajamil' s heart became so pure at the sight of the Lord's men 
that he wanted to prostrate before them and say something, but they 
vanished suddenly. 

Having been saved thus, Ajamil gave up his bad habits. He left the house, 
left the prostitute, and all his worldly connections. He went to the banks of 
the Ganga and began to do bhajan. He worshipped the Lord for many years 
and, as a result, obtained Him. How auspicious the Lord's name is. 
The Yamadutas went to Yamaraj and said, "Sir, you did not warn us about 
who we should go to, and who we should stay away from. Please tell us how 
many rulers do the good and bad people of the world have. If there are many 
rulers, they are bound to clash. If you are the only ruler, why were we 
humiliated at Ajamil' s house? When we went to fetch Ajamil, some four 
armed men came. They wore garlands and golden robes. They were smiling 
gently and looked like people from some divine land. They snatched Ajamil 
from us, and brushed us aside roughly. Please tell us who they were." 
Yamaraj understood what had happened. He said, 'Apart from me, the world 
has one Master who pervades the world the way thread pervades cloth. It is 
the Lord who has laid down the laws of Dharma. It is extremely difficult to 
understand the subtleties of the laws fully. I know them. So do 



114 



Swayambhuva Manu, Narada, Prahalad, Shukadev, Bali and a few more. 
Others do not understand the finer points. 



% crfM' H H£Mdls4 

Praaye ^na ve ^da tadidam na mahaajanoayam 
de \yaa vimohitamatirbata maayayaalam, 
Trayyam jadeekritamatirmadhu pushpitaayaam 
Vaitaanike^ mahati karmani yujyamaanah. 
6.3.25. 

The Mayadevi* of the Lord has created a vast expanse of activities which 
confuses people. This does not bring salvation. Only devotion to the Lord 
brings salvation. 

The fact that Ajamil took the Lord's name at the moment of death proves 
that the Lord's stamp is on him, and his calling out to his son is secondary. 
The Lord is a lover of His name. He tells us of His many names, and chants 
them Himself. Every atom of nature vibrates with His name, so anyone 
taking His name matches the wavelength of the Lord. His spirit melts in the 
spirit of the Lord, and his feelings mingle with the Lord's feelings. Then, all 
his sins and suffering are destroyed. 

You see, past papas result in taapa*, and wrong actions undertaken in the 
present are papas. The name of the Lord activates a release from the action 
as well as the result of (bad) actions. 

So, my men, be alert. Never go to a place where the Lord's name is 
remembered, spoken or sung. But definitely go to the person who never 
utters His name, whose thoughts never turn towards Him, and who has no 
love for the feet of the Lord." 

dHHil^H^dls^drclw^riiH I | ^.3.^ 

Jihvaa na vakti bhagavadgunanamadhe yam 
che ^tashcha na smarati tacchranaaravindam, 
Krishnaaya no namati yachchira e ^kadaapi 
Taanaanayadhvamasatoakrita-vishnukrityaan. 
6.3.29. 



115 



The story of Ajamil is narrated to explain that Aja* had mil* with Avidya*, 
and was deluded by worldly attractions. He obtained release when he uttered 
the name of the Lord. The purpose of the Name, is to free us from the bonds 
of Maya* and Moha*. A person who takes the name of the Lord chooses the 
right path, and the Grace of the Lord's name, the Grace of the King of 
names, brings him blessings and salvation. 

So, the praises of the Lord's name in the first three chapters of the sixth 
Skandha are now complete. After this come the stories of Indra's 
succumbing to arrogance, Vritasura's death, Diti giving birth to the 
Marudganas, the story of Chitraketu, the blissful existence of Shankarji, and 
the story of Prahalad. All these you will hear tomorrow. 

Om Shantih! Shantih! Shantih! 



116 



BHAGWATAMRIT 



Pravarchan VI. 
(Skandha VI & VII) 

Yesterday we spoke of how Prachinvarhi was liberated through the nirguna 
nishthaa*, and the Prachetas, through their saguna nishthaa*. A brief account 
was given of how Brahma's son, Daksha ended his life because he could not 
bear the ignominy of having a goat's head, and how he was reborn as the son 
of the Prachetas. Thus, he was born into the warrior class of the Kshatriyas. 
The lineage of Daksha (the son of the Prachetas) should have followed, but 
the story was sidetracked by the question which cropped up, as to how a 
person can become free of sin. It would be a great injustice on the part of the 
Lord, if a person remained a sinner forever, and had no means to atone for 
even comparatively small mistakes. How appropriate is it that a person has 
to go either to heaven for ever, or to hell for eternity? There has to be 
someone, to uplift the poor and powerless, those who have fallen or are 
backward; someone who is neither cruel nor unfeeling, but so compassionate 
that the worst of sinners and sufferers can seek His protection and rise up 
again. The power of the Lord's name is emphasized to provide this 
reassurance. In the Rig Veda, it is said: 

Martaa vayam amartya sthite^ bhoori naama manaamahe\ 

The word hhih^ manaamahe^ is analyzed to mean bhajaamahe\ 
indicating, "Lord, we are surrounded by Death, and You are immortal. We 
take the shelter of Your name. We surrender to Your name." 
It is mentioned in the Shrimad Bhagwat, that even highly educated people 
are often ignorant about the power the Lord's name contains. They have 
faith in elaborate Yagyas and other rituals, but lack faith in the simple name 
of the Lord. They do not know that this little name - so like a tiny brilliant 
diamond - contains all the Grace, which is the nature of the Lord. The name 
is just like the Lord. It brings great good fortune. That is why Goswami 
Tulsidas says - 



117 



Raghuvara raavari yahai badaai, 

Nidari game aadara gareeba para karata kripaa adhikaayee. 

New, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj concludes the story of Ajamil, and begins to 
speak of the Daksha, the son of the Prachetas. Daksha used his spiritual 
powers to create much of the world. 

There is not the slightest need to doubt that the world can be created by 
mental and spiritual powers. All of us possess such powers, and this is 
proved every time we see a dream. Does the dream not seem real, while it 
lasts? It is just an example of our mental powers. In the Upanishads, it is said 
that the waking state is an office, where we conduct our worldly business, 
and we are paid according to our work. The dream state is a test for our 
mental and spiritual powers. Our mind is most active, creating men and 
women, earth and sky, gods and goddesses - creating even the Lord, in our 
dreams! The Vedas have said - ^R^tT w ar^TcT 'manasaa prajaa asritjat' - 
the people were created by the mind. 

Although Daksha Prajapati created the world through his mental and 
spiritual powers, it would not endure. The world would remain for as long as 
he projected it, and vanish as soon as his will power shifted. Seeing this, 
Prajapati Daksha went to a place of pilgrimage called Aghmarshan, situated 
in the Vindhya Mountains. He undertook an intense tapasya, which pleased 
the Lord. The Lord appeared in His eight-armed form, seated on His Garuda. 
Daksha praised the Lord, saying, "Lord, what is, and what is not, is all You! 
The believers and the atheists quarrel with each other verbally and 
physically. However, those who know You, know that it is You alone who 
illumines both the believers and the disbelievers. Those who say 'asti'* get 
their food from You, and those who say naasti'* also get their food from 
You. You are one. Please fulfill my desire." 

After Daksha' s prolonged prayer, the Lord told him to give up the effort of 
mental creation, and to begin physical procreation - fcH°9cn^#TWT 

'mithunavyavaayadharminyaam '. 

Prajapati Daksha then married Asikree, the daughter of Panchajana. They 
had many sons, who were called the Haryashva and the Shabalaashva. 
Daksha told them all to procreate, so they went to the Narayana Sarovara to 
practice asceticism first. However, Naradji influenced them into giving up 
worldly desires and becomes ascetics. 

Daksha Prajapati was furious when he heard about this development. People 
always talk about how dearly fathers love their sons. They will grieve if 
anyone convinces the sons to give up worldly joys before they are mature. 
Hence, Daksha' s anger was quite natural. 



118 



Just then, Naradji came to Daksha Prajapati. Daksha Prajapati abused him 
left and right, saying, "You Tantukrintan (strummer of strings)! You have 
destroyed my lineage! You have turned my little ones - who don't even 
know what is good and what is bad - into beggars! I gave them birth with 
the hope of making them into family men. It is because you stay in one place 
that you have the opportunity to spoil people. Now, go - you will never 
again be able to linger in any place for more than two ghadis*." 
Naradji accepted the curse with joy. He said, "Dakshaji, you have done me a 
great favor. Had you not given me this curse, I would have made a hut or an 
ashram, gathered disciples and accumulated worldly possessions. Now, I 
will not remain anywhere for long. I will go around freely. You have made 
me a virakta* by giving me this curse. I thank you for this:" 

E^taavaan saadhuvaado hi titikshe^te^shvarah svayam. 

Shri Shukadevji pointed out that Naradji could easily have retaliated by 
cursing Daksha in return, but he did not misuse his spiritual powers. The 
sadhuta* in this world reposes in a capable person restraining himself, and 
refusing to retaliate even when people misbehave. 

Daksha began to think that it was futile to have sons, if they were to be 
turned into monks, instead of increasing the world's population. Hearing 
this, Brahmaji came to Daksha and counseled him. "Your sons are 
influenced into becoming monks, so have daughters. Then, no monk will try 
to take them away!" 

This gives a clear indication that our forefathers had the knowledge for 
choosing the sex of the child they wished to have. Daksha obeyed Brahmaji, 
and had daughters. He got them married to men of virtue and greatness, and 
they had so many children in all, that the entire populace was called 
'Dakshayinee'. 'Daksha' means 'a skillful person who knows the principles 
of Dharma, and controls his own mind and the world. ' All the people in the 
world are his daughter's descendents, and thus his, as well. The Shrimad 
Bhagwat gives thousands of names and their descriptions, but I merely make 
a brief mention, due to shortage of time. 

Aditi and Diti were both Daksha' s daughters. From the adhyatmik* angle, 
these are vrittis*. They were married to Kashyapji. You have been told 
earlier that Kashyapji was a form of the Lord. The Sanskrit meaning 
indicates that Kashyap is the observer. 

Kashyap's wife Aditi is a unifying tendency. She gave birth to the Adityas*. 
The root diametrically opposite is 'deen kshaye \ making the word diti. Diti 



119 



is Kashyapji's other wife, who gives birth to the Daityas. Those whose 
tendencies are lowly and unrighteous are called daityas - the sons of Diti! 
And Aditi's son, Aditya*, brightens the whole world, prompting people 
towards Dharmic* activities like the sandhya vandan*, etc. 
One of Aditi's sons was Indra. He was crowned King of all the Devtas, and 
called Devraj*. One who possesses supreme glory is called Indra. He is the 
Lord of action. He abides in our arms, and it is his strength which enables us 
to work. The adhidaiva* is Indra, the adhibhoota* is the arm, and the one 
who inspires - the foundation of all creation, the sarvadhishthaataa* 
Narayana - is the adhyatma*. For every action, the wish is born in the mind, 
and the organs of action respond according to the mind's instructions. 
If you were to ask, where does aishwarya* abide? The direct answer is that it 
abides in action. Glory comes to the one who acts. An idle, lazy person who 
puts in no effort, can never make any progress. All achievement is the result 
of effort. 

Indra 's magnificence increased when he was crowned King of the Devtas. 
All the great Devtas began to eulogise him. All this went to his head, and he 
strayed from the path of righteousness and decorum. 

Indrastribhuvanaishvaryamadollanghitasatpathah. 6. 7.2. 

Worldly success is heady, and the intoxication results in the person 
overstepping the boundaries of Dharma, decorum and decency. 

Hristo drishyati dripto dharmam atikraamati. 

One day, when Indra was holding court, Vrihaspati - the Guru of the Devtas 
- entered the court. Vrihaspati knows all the Vedas and Shastras. During the 
swasti vaachan*, it is always said: 

Om svastina indro vriddhashravaah svastinah pooshaa vishvave ^daah, 
Svastinastaariksho arishtane^mih svastino vrihaspatirdadhaatu. 

This mantra contains every kind of grammatical link. As per the mantra, 
Indra and Vrihaspati should always remain united in good will. However, 
what happened was that Indra observed Vrihaspati enter, but turned his gaze 



120 



away, violating the codes of etiquette. He was carried away by the pride of 
his elevated position. Vrihaspati felt, "My disciple, Indra, is overcome by 
arrogance. Arrogance is no good - it must be broken." Thinking thus, 
Vrihaspati vanished. 

When the Daityas heard that Vrihaspati had left Indra' s court because Indra 
failed to show him proper respect, they desired to take advantage of the 
situation, and went to their Guru, Shukracharya. 

You see, Vrihaspati - the Guru of the Devtas - has wisdom and prudence, 
while Shukracharya - the Guru of the Daityas - has power and cunning. The 
Sanskrit language gives one meaning of the word 'shukra' as virility. The 
Devtas have wisdom in the form of Vrihaspati and the Daityas have strength 
in the form of Shukracharya. They also have siddhi*, mantra*, and tantra*. 
Shukracharya increases demons with all these powers. 
When Shukracharya heard that Vrihaspati had left the Devtas, he advised the 
Daityas to attack the Devtas. When attacked by the Daityas, the Devtas 
searched in vain for their Guru to guide them. Ultimately, they were forced 
to flee and hide in the forests. 

Eventually, all the Devtas went to Brahmaji, who is the Great Grandfather of 
all the Devtas and the Daityas. He has equal goodwill for both. If you 
wonder how Brahmaji is their Great Grandfather, you will be reminded that 
the Devtas and Daityas are sons of Kashyap. Kashyapji is the son of 
Marichi*, who is Brahmaji's son. So, Brahmaji becomes the Great 
Grandfather of both groups, and it is natural that he should have equal 
affection for both. Despite this, he gives the best guidance to whoever seeks 
his help and advice. 

So Brahmaji told the Devtas to get a purohit*, and obtain the knowledge 
from him, about how to achieve victory. The Devtas went to Vishwaroop, 
even though Vishwaroop 's mother did not come from a good lineage. Her 
lineage was a combination of Devtas, Daityas and humans. Vishwaroop had 
three faces. He would drink the elixir of heaven with one mouth, drink wine 
with another and eat food through the third - ^wfcl ^t4«t m\5 'somapeetha 
suraapeetha annaada '. 

The Devtas begged Vishwaroop to become their purohit. At first he refused, 
saying that he did not wish to align himself with any one group. Later he 
relented. He felt that it would be improper to refuse the appeals of so many 
great demigods., who had come to seek his help. "Come, I accept to be your 
purohit," he said. 

Then Vishwaroop taught Indra the science of the Narayana Kavacha*. The 
eighth chapter of the sixth Skandha of the Bhagwat describes this Narayana 
Kavacha. Vishwaroop also gave full instructions about the method of 



121 



purifying the body, and the nyas* of twelve, eight and six word mantras, in 
the descending and reverse orders. 

Nyas is the process of establishing a Devta in every limb and organ. A 
human body is composed of bones, flesh and skin - it is totally impure. It 
can, however, be given a degree of divinity by superimposing mantra nyas*, 
Devnyas*, srishti nyas*, sthitinyas*, pralaynyas*, vyapak nyas*, and others. 
The upasana shastras are full of the science of such rituals. When the 
Naarayana Kavacha is chanted, demigods are established in every part of the 
body, which then acquires a degree of divinity. 

When Indra acquired the Narayana Kavacha from his new Guru, 
Vishwaroop, and learnt its proper usage, he attacked the Daityas and 
defeated them. He regained his position as King of heaven. 
As mentioned before, Vishwaroop 's ancestors consisted of Daityas as well 
as Devtas. So, during his ritual fire worship, he favored the Devtas at times, 
but secretly made offerings for the Daityas in between. At times his 
oblations were for the Lord, and at times they were for selfish gain. Indra 
caught him red handed and killed him on the spot. Now he was faced with 
Brahmahatya*, because he had killed his purohit. Indra folded his hands and 
accepted his guilt. He did not try to make excuses, saying he had killed 
Vishwaroop unknowingly. It was Indra' s nobility which made him accept 
his guilt without hesitation or fear. 

The entire Earth was filled with a feeling of forgiveness. People always feel 
sympathy towards those who have modesty and humility, admit their 
mistakes honestly, and have soft and gentle hearts. However, when someone 
raises his head with pride, declaring that he has done no wrong, his 
arrogance increases and he loses the sympathy of all. 

Having won the sympathy of the entire creation, Indra divided the 
Brahmahatya into four portions. One portion for the Earth, one for water, 
one for the trees and one for women. All four lovingly accepted to share the 
punishment, for the sake of honoring Indra. Thus freed from the 
consequences of his deed, Indra regained full glory. 

Now, when Vishwaroop 's father, Tvashta, heard that Indra had killed his 
son, he started a havan, based on the Vedas, to harm Indra. 
The Vedic mantras possess immense power. Katyayan* has written many 
commentaries upon the ancient treatise on rituals, of every mantra of the 
Yajurveda. He has described in detail which mantra can be used to obtain 
which worldly desire. It is called 'Yajurvidhan-sutram'. The routine of 
teaching the Katyayan Shroat Sutra is no longer practiced. People would 
have lapped it up eagerly, had it come from abroad, and foreigners had 
acknowledged its value and utility! 



122 



When Tvasta offered a sacrifice for harming Indra, he uttered the words 
fer^r 'indrashatro vivardhasva', which means, 'May Indra' s enemy 
grow'. A huge Asura called Vritra emerged from the fire. All the Vedas 
describe Vritrasura* indicating that this is a power which engulfs the ability 
of a person to think clearly, just as fog blocks out the rays of the sun. So, as 
soon as Vritrasura emerged, the whole world became dark. Accompanied by 
well-armed Daityas, he attacked Indra. 

Now, the story of Vritrasura is a long one, so instead of going into it in 
detail, I will just say that a long and fierce war ensued between Vritrasura 
and Indra. Finally, Indra challenged Vritrasura to come forward. When 
Vritrasura came directly before Indra, he saw the vajra* in Indra' s hand. 
Listen to the background of this vajra. Earlier, in the same war, Vritrasura 
had gained victory over the Devtas. The defeated Devtas went to the Lord, 
and told Him of their woes. 

Lord Vishnu is always partial to His devotees. You were told earlier, that 
unlike Dharmraj*, the Lord is not confined to follow ordinary laws of sin 
and merit. He favors those who love Him. There is no doubt that the bhakti 
sampradaya* would disappear if the Lord didn't show such partiality. How 
could people feel love and devotion for the Lord, if He didn't save them, 
help them to progress, reduce their suffering and help them to overcome 
their faults? 

So, the Lord Vishnu has to favor His devotees. The Daityas are aware of this 
the fact that the Lord sings the praises of those who sing His praises - WrR 
^hh« 'bhajantam bhajamaanasya '. 

Hearing their problem, the Lord Vishnu advised Indra, "The father of 
Vishwaroop - who you killed - has created Vritrasura, through a havan. He 
has undertaken a very powerful ritual for your destruction. I will not 
intercede at this point, because it would not be proper for Me to do so. Go to 
Dadhichi Rishi* and ask him for his bones. When he gives you his bones, 
make a vajra from them. Vritrasura will be killed only by that vajra," 
It seemed impossible to the Devtas that Dadhichi Rishi would give them his 
bones while he lived. Still, they went to him, as directed by the Lord, and 
told him why they had come. 

Dadhichi asked, "Devtas, don't you know how dearly everybody loves his 
body? Even if the Lord Vishnu were to come Himself, to beg for my bones - 
fq^FfMFT f^i^ ' bhikshamaanaaya vishnave^' - how could I give them to 
Him?" 



123 



Nanu svaarthaparo loko na ve ^da parasankatam, 
Yadi ve ^da na yaache ^tan e Vi naaha yadeeshvarah. 
6.10.6. 

The people in this world are so selfish that they do not understand other 
people's difficulties. They would not ask for help if they understood the 
other person's difficulty. The one who asks for help should understand the 
situation of the person he appeals to. By the same token, the other person 
will always extend all possible help, if he understands the difficulty of the 
person who seeks it. The fact is that everyone in this world is engrossed with 
his own selfish interest. So, Devtas, tell me how can I give my bones to 
you?" 

The Devtas replied, "Sir, it is the nature of great people that they give up 
even their bodies, to help others who are suffering. It is the highest Dharma 
to help others, even if it means sacrificing one's life to do so. This body is 
destined to die, eventually, so what can be better than it's being given up for 
the sake of doing good to others?" 

Dadhichi said, "Devtas, it was only to hear you speak about Dharma, that I 
had refused to comply with your request. r^FRT -hV^i^s^ 'Tyajantam 
santyajaamyaham ' - this body will leave me anyway, so why shouldn't I 
leave it now?" Dadhichi went into a samadhi. He immersed himself into the 
Brahman. His spirit left his body. 

Dadhichi was a great devotee of the Lord Shiva. His greatness is described 
repeatedly in the Shiva Puran*. He is the actual Dadhyangaatharvana. 
Dadhyang and Dadhichi are two formations of the same word. He was 
skilled in the science of Brahmavidya*. He had even cut off his head, and 
given a discourse through the head of a horse attached to his neck. Later, his 
original head was replaced. Birth and death held no meaning for him. 
Indra's personality was radiant, when he went into the battlefield with the 
vajra (made form Dadhichi 's bones) in his hand. The vajra was filled with 
the spiritual power of Dadhichi's tapasya. Secondly, it had the sanction of 
the Lord Vishnu. These two factors gave a fresh impetus to the Devtas, and 
they attacked the Daityas with renewed vigor. The Daityas began to scatter 
and flee. Vritrasura tried to stop them, urging them to fight with courage, 
because death would, in any case, come one day. However, the Devtas' 
ferocity induced such fear that they paid no heed to Vritrasura. The Devtas 
continued to attack the fleeing Daityas. 

Vritrasura stood alone before Indra and rebuked him, saying, "What kind of 
Dharma is it that you attack those who flee in fear? You claim to be a great 



124 



Devta and on the other hand, you kill those in retreat? Come! I stand before 
you! Attack me." 

Vritrasura and Indra fought grimly. While fighting, Vritrasura experienced a 
surge of such bhakti that wonderful words of praise burst form his lips. He 
said: 

Traivargakaayaasavidhaatamasmat patirvidhatte^ purushasya shakra, 
Tatonume yo bhgavatprasaado yo durlabhoakinchanagocharoanyaih. 
6.11.23. 

"Indra, I know that victory belongs to you. However, the Lord's Grace is not 
on those, to whom He bestows victory, glory and the Kingdom. His Grace is 
on those He considers His own, and from whom He snatches everything 
away." 

Just see the unshakable faith in Vritrasura' s words. How good it would be if 
people had such staunch faith! 

Vritrasura said, "Indra, the Lord will give you the Glory, because you are the 
outsider; and He will take it away from me, because I am His own. I know 
how deeply He loves me." 

As he spoke, Vritrasura felt as though the Lord actually stood before him. 
The four verses of praise spoken by him are called the Chatushloki 
Bhagwat*. Listen to them: 

3^fT?mT W WTT: "^fPT *M ^Sflrlt: I 

far Mcr o^fct fsRwn TFfrsT^^r^r c^ft i 

Aham hare^ tava paadaikamoladaasaanudaaso bhavitaasmi bhooyah, 
Manah smare ^taasupate Vgunaanste " grineeta vakkarma karotu kaayah. 
Na naakaprishtham na cha paarame ^shtyam na saarvabhoumam na 
rasaadhipatyam, 

Na yogasiddheerapunarbhavam vaa samanjasa tvaa virahayya kaankshe \ 



125 



Ajaatapakshaa iva maataram khagaah stanyam yathaa vatsataraah 
kshudhaartaah, 

Priyam priye\a vyushitam vishanna manoaravindaaksha didrikshate^ 
tvaam. 

Mamottamashlokajane^shu sakhyam sansaarachakre^ bhramatah 
svakarmabhih, 

Tvanmaayayaatmaatmajadaarage^he^shvaasakta chittasya na naatha 

bhooyaat. 

6.11.24,25,26,27. 

Vritrasura began to pray, "Lord, I do not desire mukti. I desire to be born 
again, in order to become the servant of Your servant, in my next birth. Let 
my mind dwell upon Your qualities, my head bow at Your feet, and my 
body be occupied in serving You. I have no wish to achieve the status of 
Brahma or Indra. I wish only to get the dust of Your feet. I surrender to Your 
feet. What do I need worldly goods for? 

O lotus-eyed Lord! My heart yearns only to see You. My longing is akin to 
that of little birds sitting hungrily in a nest, waiting for their mother to bring 
them food. It is akin to the hungry little calf, tied to a post, wondering when 
his mother will finish grazing and come to feed him. It is akin to the wife, 
who waits for her husband to return from a long journey. I don't care if I am 
born repeatedly, but Grace me that I always have the company of Your 
devotees. Grace me that wherever I go, I see the faces of those who love 
You." 

Then Vritrasura' s demonic tendencies rose up again, and he lifted his spear 
to attack Indra. Indra cut off his arm with the Vajra, but he attacked so 
fiercely with his other arm, that Indra' s vajra fell on the ground. 
Vritrasura said, "Indra, don't be ashamed. This is not the time for shame. 
Pick up your fallen vajra. You have obtained it by the Grace of God. The 
Lord is nurturing you. So, pick it up and kill me with it." Indra picked up the 
vajra again. 

When Vritrasura tried to attack again, Indra cut off his other arm. Shri 
Shukadevji Maharaj said, "Parikshit, when Indra lifted the vajra to kill 
Vritrasura, he spoke words of praise without the slightest rancor - 

'J^dcM: W^TW J ldfafHi|: I I *kXRX6. 

Indro vritraavachah shrutvaa gataaleekamapoojayat, 

Griheetavajrah prahasanstamaaha gatavismayah. 

6.12.18. 



126 



You will find the same mantra in the Rig Veda - ^fFT cn^fpi^w 'indro 
vritrayaa vajramudyate ^kshata '. The meaning is that Indra lifted the vajra to 
kill Vritrasura. Another mantra of the Vedas is q^s-w^w: 
'vajrahastapurandarah ', which means that Indra keeps a vajra in his hand. 
Indra had cut off both the arms of Vritrasura. So, when he lifted the vajra to 
kill the demon, Vritrasura opened his huge mouth and swallowed Indra 
along with the elephant he rode. Indra cut open his stomach from inside and 
came out. Then he killed Vritrasura by cutting off his head. A bright glow of 
light emerged from Vritrasura' s body and merged into the form of the Lord. 
Indra became King once more. All were happy, but Indra was worried about 
the Brahmahatya he had incurred again. Earlier, he had divided it into four 
parts, but how could he stave off the consequences this time? 
The fact is that Indra had been reluctant to kill Vritrasura because of the 
Brahmahatya factor. He had done so only because the terrified Rishis and 
Devtas begged him to do so. 

Indra knew that Vritrasura was a devotee of the Lord. He had, moreover, 
been born of an excellent seed - the ritual fire - with mantras of welcome. 
So, it was completely unrighteous to kill him. 

There is a common Dharma for common people. A sentence in the Vedas 
says T-FT ft^TT^ sraffin ^?#T 'maa hinsayaad sarvaani bhootaani ', which means 
that do not kill or cause pain to any creature. 

Indra' s fears on this score were justified. When Indra killed Vritrasura at the 

behest of the Devtas and Rishis, Brahmahatya appeared before him. So 

terrifying was her form that Indra fled, and hid in the Mansarovara*. 

All three worlds were anxious when Indra disappeared. They placed Nahush 

on the throne, but when he misbehaved with the Mahatmas, he was turned 

into a snake and removed from the throne. 

Then Indra found Vrahspati. 

King Parikshit placed a question to Shri Shukadevji about this. 

Rajatamah svabhaavasya Brahman vritrasya paapmanah, 
Naaraayane " bhagavati kathamaaseed dridhaa matih. 
6.14.1. 



121 



Note the word 'katham'. The word 'kathaa' is routinely understood to mean 
'a story', in Hindi. In the Rig Veda, however, it has been used to ask' 'why 
so?' 



Ke ^na prakaare ^na iti hatha, ye ^na prakare ^na iti yathaa, 

Te^na prakaare^na iti tathaa, sarve^na prakaare^na prakaare^na iti 

sarvathaa. 

So, when Raja Parikshit heard about Vritrasura's devotion for the Lord, he 
asked about the background. 

Vritrasura was a demon; he was fighting the Devtas. How and why did such 
devotion develop in his heart?" he asked. 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj replied, "Parikshit, there was a great king who 
lived in the region of Shurasena's capital, Mathura. His name was 
Chitraketu*. He had great wealth and power, and many Queens. His people 
were happy, but King Chitraketu was sad. 

One day, Angira Rishi came to King Chitraketu. The King welcomed him 
with great reverence. Later, the Rishi asked him, "King, your Queens are all 
happy, your people are all happy, and your ministers are all loyal to you. 
Then why do I see a shadow of sorrow on your face? Tell me, what is 
troubling you?" 

You must realize that the sages of yore would convey the essence of Dharma 
through their queries of well being. The points mentioned by the Rishi were 
an indication of the ideal situation. 

The King replied, 'Sir, you are right in saying that I am not happy. No doubt 
I have all I need, including Queens and manliness. However, I am sad 
because I do not have a son." 

The Rishi told the King that his fortune indicated that he would have a son. 
"I can definitely grant you a son, but he will be the cause for both joy and 
sorrow. It is not that he will bring you only joy." 

You see, what is to be, is what is granted as a boon. Nothing new is created. 
One only gets an indication of what is to come. Horoscopes and astrology 
also give indications only of what lies ahead. 

Angira rishi prepared a vessel for the oblation, and offered it to the Tavshtaa 
Devta. He gave the rest of the potion to the senior-most Queen of Chitraketu, 
and departed. The Queen conceived, and had a son. Chitraketu was filled 
with happiness. The whole kingdom was joyful. All the Queens celebrated. 



128 



See how things change with time. The King began to favor the senior-most 
Queen, causing jealousy amongst the other Queens. They had the child 
poisoned. The death of the child turned all the joy into deep sorrow. 
It is the same with the world. The Upanishads have stated clearly, ftpr: c^T 
Tfc^rfrT 'priyah tvaam rotsyati ' - the one you love will bring you tears; you 
will have to be bound to him. So, this mortal world is just not worth getting 
attached to. 

Angira and Narad came, when the palace was filled with lamentations. 
Chitraketu did not even recognize them, as Angira reminded him of the boon 
of the son and the warning of this being a mixed blessing. He also 
introduced Naradji. 

Naradji and Angira tried their best to counsel the King. They used their 
spiritual power to summon the spirit of the dead child, and told him to return 
to his parents. 

The spirit said, "I do not even recognize them. I do not know who they are, 
or in which birth of mine were they my parents. I have been born millions of 
times, in various species, and have had millions of parents, so I am unable to 
recognize them." 

When the King and Queen heard these words, their attachment for their son 
evaporated. They performed the last rites. Naradji gave Chitraketu a mantra 
for his salvation, and the king dutifully worshipped the Lord in the form of 
the Shesha*. The worship achieved success in just seven days, and the King 
had a vision of the Lord as the Shesha. He began to praise Him: 

Ajita jitah samamatibhih saadhubhirbhavaan jitaatmabhirbhavataa, 
Vijitaaste ^api cha bhajataamakaamaatmanaam ya aatmadoatikarunah. 
6.16.34. 

"Lord, You are ever victorious. You are so overcome by compassion that 
good people who possess equanimity, win You over. You have also won 
them over, by Your various qualities. You give Yourself to whoever 
worships You selflessly. You are blessed. You have such power that You 
can destroy all the faults and weaknesses of men." 

After many more words of praise, the Lord Shesha gave Chitraketu a boon, 
and made him a siddha purusha*. He also gave him an air plane. Chitraketu 
then began to go around with the Gandharvas*, listening to divine music and 
obtaining many worldly pleasures. 



129 



One day, Chitraketu was taking a ride on his plane and he reached the 
Kailash mountain of Lord Shankar. He was unfamiliar with the habits and 
customs of that region. He should have known that just as every country has 
its own laws and customs, the norms of the Devtas are different from those 
of humans. Those who criticize the actions of the Devtas do not realize that 
the Devtas are not guided by our norms. 

Chitraketu made the same mistake. He saw that the Lord Shankar was giving 
a discourse upon tattvagnan* to Rishis and Munis*, with his consort, 
Gauriji, seated on his lap. 

Here, it is important to understand that the fruit of tattvagnan is not obtained 
after death. It is not a post dated cheque - it is a cash profit! It gives the 
experience of leading a fully liberated life, free of dualities and imbalances. 
The Lord Shankar is the personification of tattvagnan. He spoke with 
complete absence of any type of differentiation or tendency. Chitraketu 's 
thinking was of an ordinary level, and his restricted concepts of decorum 
made him think that it was improper of the Lord Shankar to have Gauriji on 
his lap, while giving a discourse to the sages. He began to accuse the Lord 
Shankar of impropriety and hypocrisy, saying, "What kind of a tattvagnani is 
this, who speaks loftily with his wife seated on his lap, in public?" 
Lord Shankar just smiled when he heard these aspersions. He let them pass 
because he felt that they were not of the slightest importance. People mutter 
in their sleep. Those who lack the knowledge of the ultimate Truth, wander 
blindly in the darkness of illusions. The Lord Shankar was, therefore, totally 
unaffected by Chitraketu 's words. 

Gauriji, however, was angered. "Have you become our ruler these days?" 
She asked angrily. "Have you been given the authority to punish people for 
what you consider to be improper? But, my son, never again misbehave this 
way with great people - H Wi" ^ f^wr 'na kartaa putra kilbisham '. As a 
result of this impertinence, you will have to go into the Asura yoni*." 
Hearing Gauriji' s words, Chitraketu immediately got down from his plane 
and bowed to her. 'Deviji*," he said, "I have not come to ask your pardon - 

^ffcf?T «i«Sfeti % cR^T ?RT I I ^V9.^9 

Pratigrihnaami te^ shaapamaatmanonjalinaambike\ 
Daivarmartyaaya yatproktam poorvadishtam hi tasya tat. 
6.17.17. 

I fold my hands and accept your curse with joy. That is because whatever the 
Devtas do for humans is merely a forecast of events to come. So, I do not 



130 



ask you to forgive me, but I do request you to erase any ill will you may feel 
for me. It does not matter to me whether I attain the body of a Devta or a 
Daitya. Whatever type of body I obtain, God will always be with me, and I 
will continue to love Him." 

Hearing Chitraketu's words, the Lord Shankar told Gauriji, "See the 
greatness of the Lord's devotees. Despite your curse, Chitraketu feels no 
rancor. The Lord's devotees are always like that." 

Answering Parikshit's question, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj said, "King, it was 
that same Chitraketu who became Vritrasura, and this is why his devotion 
for the Lord remained unaffected by his becoming a Daitya." 
Now, when Vritrasura died, and Indra regained his throne to undertake an 
Ashvamedha Yagya*, the Daityas began to roam the forests in fear. Their 
mother, Diti, was distressed to see their plight. A mother's love for her 
children is supreme. The son is the personified portion of the mother's heart. 
Her blood turns into milk for his nourishment. Love has no form, but it takes 
the form of milk, and enters the stomach of her baby. A mother loves her 
child more than anyone loves anyone else in the world. 
When Diti was deeply distressed, Kashyapji came to her ashram for a few 
days, to give her solace. A husband is bound to have sympathy when he sees 
his wife suffer. Diti gave him such loving service that she won him over 
completely. 

V$ fepTT ^TSfacTt faSHfa fevfW I 

E\am striyaa jadeebhooto vidvaanapi vidagdhayaa, 
Vaadhamityaah vivasho na tachchitram hiyoshiti. 
6.18.29. 

Kashyap Maharaj was wise and learned. However, he was so influenced by 
Diti's loving service that despite being a detached observer, he 
unconsciously identified with her, and offered her a boon. 
Shri Shukadevji adds a rider here, H crf^r % ^McT 'na tacchitram hiyoshiti'. 
There is nothing surprising about the fact that a woman can control her 
husband through loving service, because a woman's heart is predominantly 
full of love. 

Diti saw that Kashyapji was pleased with her, and said, "Indra killed two of 
my sons, and is torturing the others. Please give me a son who can kill Indra 
- ^r*H^6 u i 'putramindrahanam vrine " ' ". 

Kashyapji lowered his head when he heard this request. Indra is also 
Kashyapji 's son, by his other wife, Aditi. Diti was asking for a son who 



131 



would kill his other son! Kashyapji was stunned to think that his son would 
kill another son of his; that Diti's son would kill Aditi's son. He felt deeply 
unhappy and perplexed. Then he folded his hands before the Lord and said, 
"Thy will be done." 

Kashyapji told Diti about an anushthaan* which would last one year. This 
included japa* and ritual worship. He told her that if she could undertake 
this ritual faultlessly for one year, she would have a son who would kill 
Indra. 

Diti was delighted. She started the anushthaan without delay. The method is 
described in the eighteenth and nineteenth chapters of the sixth Skandha of 
the Shrimad Bhagwat. Just a couple of days before its completion, Diti made 
a small mistake. Indra came to know about this, because he had taken on the 
garb of a bramchari and was serving Diti to help her complete the vrata* 
successfully. 

Indra entered Diti's womb, when she made a small mistake. He cut the baby 
into seven parts, but the baby did not die. Indra proceeded to cut each part 
into seven parts. The baby was now in forty nine parts. 
You see, the wind which blows in our world is of forty nine kinds. The 
shastras have enumerated them, given their names and described the actions 
of each. 

When we think about this, we understand the adhibhoota* form of the forty 
nine pieces in Diti's womb. When they manifest in their adhidaiva* forms, 
they were called the Marutganas*. Indra was the fiftieth to come out of 
Diti's womb, along with them. 

Didi asked Indra how it happened that her prayer for one son resulted in her 
getting forty nine sons, and how he came to be with them. 
Indra said, "Mother, I served you because I came to know of your intention. 
When I saw the mistake you made, I entered your womb. However, your 
intensity and sincerity were so strong that the baby did not die even when I 
cut it into forty nine pieces. They are all alive, and have become my eternal 
brothers. Please be gracious, and let me have them. I will keep them with 
me, in the form of Marutganas." 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj told Parikshit that Diti was satisfied with Indra's 
sincerity, and permitted him to take the Marutganas. Indra took them to his 
land and made them all Devtas. 

How would Diti's worship of the Lord ever result in Daityas being born, and 
killing Indra? The effect of worship is that even demons become Devtas, and 
those destined to die become immortal. The Lord is sarvaatma*. He has no 
ill will for any, no negative tendencies, no faults, and no aberrations 



132 



whatsoever. Whoever meditates upon such a Paramatma becomes the 
Paramatma, Himself. 

After narrating the story of the Marutganas, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj 
concluded the sixth Skandha by describing the punsavana* vrata, and 
embarked on the seventh Skandha. 

The seventh Skandha is called the 'Ooti* Skandha. It contains fifteen 
chapters. Right at the start, Raja Parikshit comments that the Lord has equal 
good will for all, is loved by all, is everybody's Atma, and wants the well 
being of all. "Then why doe He repeatedly favor the Devtas and kill the 
Daityas?" asked Parikshit. "I have some doubts about His good will for both. 
Please clear my doubts." 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj praised Parikshit's question and explained. 
"Actually, a person's life is molded by the desires in his heart. The Lord 
Graces or rejects, according to the desire of the individual. There is a time 
for sattvaguna* to rise in Prakriti, and goodness increases. Sometimes, it is 
time for rajoguna*, or tamoguna* to rise. The Lord gives powers to each 
tendency when its time comes. At the rise of sattvaguna, He gives strength to 
the Devtas, and at the rise of rajoguna, it is the Daityas who receive His 
strength. It is His strength in them all. 

The Lord mixes with the time and gives strength to the appropriate item. 
Rice grows in its time, and wheat grows in its season, by His Grace. 
Similarly, all the plants and trees, animals and birds, men and women, get 
their strength from the Lord. 

You are aware that electricity is everywhere. It creates light in a bulb, wind 
through the fan, heat in a heater, and ice in a refrigerator. In the same way, it 
is the power of the Lord in all we see. 

It is not as though the Lord gets annoyed because He gets no gifts or worship 
from the daityas. Nor does He help the devtas because they offer Him gifts 
and worship! Annoyance and pleasure are reactions connected to the body. 
Worldly people consider some to be friends and some to be foes, because 
they identify with their bodies. The Lord never has a body like ours, 
composed of the five elements; hence there is no question of His having any 
feeling of duality, like attachment and aversion." 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj went on to say, "Parikshit, Naradji had told your 
Grandfather, Yudhishthira, some points about the samatvaguna* of the Lord. 
This was during the ashvamedha Yagya* done by Yudhishthira, where 
Naradji was present. 

The manner of conversation of those times is noteworthy. Modern 
inventions are a result of mathematical calculations. All the action in the 
world has fire and wind as its source, but they are unable to give the 



133 



knowledge of the Brahman. The Kenopanishad contains a story. It says that 
Agni* was sent to locate the Brahman, but the power of heat could not 
reveal the Brahman. The wind was sent next, but there is an order in the 
movement of the wind, and it tried to locate the Brahman through 
calculation. The Brahman, however, eludes all calculations - including those 
of the latest computers. Then Indra came. Indra is the Devta of action, but 
the Brahman cannot be reached through any action. Ultimately, when 
Brahmavidya* emerged, then the mental mode took on the form of the 
Brahman. The experience of the Brahman is possible only through 
Brahmavidya. Studying the Vedas is the only method for obtaining 
knowledge about the tattva*, or the shashvat satya*, because the knowledge 
of the Vedas has not come from any human being. New inventions are 
definitely the result of modern thought patterns, but the topic of the 
Paramatma can be understood only by the ancient examples. 
Therefore, Shukadevji Maharaj says, "Parikshit, the spirit of Shishupala 
merged into the form of the Lord at Yudhishthira's Yagya. Astonished to see 
this, Yudhishthira asked Naradji how this could have happened, since 
Shishupala had always hated Shri Krishna so much. 

In reply, Devarshi* Narada told Yudhishthira the story of Prahlada. He 
explained that it is essential for the mind to be focused on the Lord. It makes 
no difference whether a person is a Devta or a Daitya. Prahlad was born a 
Daitya, but the Lord protected him. The Lord never pushes away anyone 
who has once attached himself to the Lord. The connection could be with 
kama, krodha, lobha or bhaya* - ^fq^[# 'kathanchinne^kshate^ 
prithak '. 

You see a child run towards his father, saying, "I will hit you!" with his 
fingers curled into a fist. When he reaches his father, the father just lifts him 
up and gives him a hug, thinking, "This is my innocent little child." The 
father is not offended when the child tugs at his beard or pulls his 
moustache! Nowadays, mothers sometimes get annoyed when their baby 
soils their clothes, but they never feel that the baby belongs to someone else! 
In the same way, one can attach one's self to the Lord by any emotion, and 
the Lord never feels that this person is not His. 

Naradji told Yudhishthira that Prahlad was the son of Hiranyakashipu. 
Hiranyakashipu and his brother, Hiranyaksha, were, in their past lives, Jay 
and Vijay, attendants of the Lord Vishnu. They became Asuras due to the 
curse of the Sanakadis. Even though Prahlad was born in this lineage, he 
became a supreme devotee of the Lord. He had all the virtues described in 
this world. So what if the Devtas were his enemies? When the question 



134 



cropped up, at their court, as to who is the Lord's greatest devotee, they were 
unanimous in declaring that Prahlad is a model devotee. 
Naradji described how distressed Hiranyaksha's wife and mother were, 
when the Lord Varaha killed him. Hiranyakashipu had gone to console them, 
and spoken of the philosophy of the Vedas. 

Vedanta* can be either Asura or Daiva. It is Asura Vedanta, when it is used 
to justify a wrong, and Daiva Vedanta, when used to help others. 
Hiranyakashipu counseled his brother's wife and mother, saying, "The soul 
never dies. The body of everything which is born has to die, anyway. So, do 
not grieve." To elaborate further, he told them the story of Suyagya, which is 
given in the Puranas. 

There is a similarity in the story of Suyagya which is given in the Rig Veda 
and the one given in the Shrimad Bhagwat. 

Hiranyakashipu said that when Suyagya died in battle, his family crowded 
round him, refusing to let him go. Yamaraj took the form of a child, and told 
them that despite being aged, they had failed to obtain understanding. "The 
man has gone where he came from. Why do you grieve for him? If your 
grief could have helped in any way, or brought him back to life, or induced 
another to appear in his place, it would be proper to grieve. However, what 
is the use of weeping and wailing for someone who will never return?" 
Hiranyakshipu then gave the example of the birds. He told them about how a 
pair of birds returned with food for the little birds waiting in the nest, only to 
find the babies trapped in the net of a hunter. Their attachment induced them 
to fly into the net, and they were also trapped. "So, why don't you accept the 
fact that death surrounds us all, including you. Hiranyaksha has departed 
today. You will have to depart some day. So why waste time on futile 
tears?" he asked. 

Hiranyakshipu thus gave such a demonic counseling to his family members 
that for a while they ceased to grieve. After this, it came to his mind that he 
should try to become immortal. He had given others a sermon upon the 
body's being transient, but for himself, he wanted to find a way to avoid 
death. 

It is the same with the people in this world. Well, my brother, why do you 
give so much importance to your body, and think - for others - that the body 
is unimportant? You do not hesitate to take what you want, even if it belongs 
to others, but when it comes to giving something to someone, you find every 
excuse to avoid giving! This is a demonic practice. It is to be given up, not 
retained. 

So, in keeping with his demonic decision, Hiranyakashipu undertook a very 
severe tapasya. His tapasya was so intense that a flame emerged from his 



135 



head and began to burn heaven. This caused a great anxiety among the 
Devtas. They went to Brahmaji, demanding to know if he was aware of what 
was happening. "We have come to inform you that Hiranyakashipu wishes 
to become the Brahma, through his tapasya. Not only that, he wants to 
destroy Vishnu, too, and snatch away all the havishya* for himself. Please 
do something!" 

Brahmaji was fully aware of what was happening. He went to 
Hiranyakashipu, and saw anthills had formed all around him, as he sat doing 
his tapasya. Brahamji's heart melted. He sprinkled some holy water from his 
kamandalu* on Hiranyakashipu. The effect of this was that Hiranyakashipu 
arose with his body gleaming like burnished gold, and his health fully 
restored. Brahmaji said, "Ask for a boon, my son." Hiranyakashipu asked 
that death should never come to him. Brahmaji told him that death was 
inevitable for every being that was born - ^pr" srf^r 'yjjanma tad 
anityam ' - since one is born, one must die. No one can escape death. ^ ^ 
rlWH ' Yad drishtam tannashatam ' - what comes before our eyes will move 
away from our range of vision. "So, the boon you have asked for is 
impossible. You can not obtain immortality." 

Hiranyakashipu racked his brains for a way out, and said, "You can grant me 
this boon - that I will not die during the day, or at night. I will not die 
indoors, or outdoors. No creature made by you should kill me. I will not be 
killed by a bodiless power, or by a Devta, nor a Daitya, or by any weapon or 
curse." 

Hiranyakashipu thus sought to be immune from all possible causes of death 
which he could think of. But, you know very well that no matter how well 
thought out the laws may be, lawyers will always find a loophole and save 
their client. It is said that law makers deliberately leave some lacunae. 
Similarly, though Brahmaji granted the boon, some routes were left open for 
his death. 

Hiranyakashipu was confident that he had outsmarted the laws and would 
now be indestructible. He drove away the Devtas from heaven and acquired 
the power to rule over the three worlds. 

You were told earlier, that even those who are banished form Vaikunth are 
given great wealth and power by the Lord. Seeing their glory, one can use 
the kaimutak* logic to imagine the incalculable glory of people living in 
Vaikunth. 

There are descriptions, in the Shrimad Bhagwat, of mountains giving up 
precious gems, rivers flowing with sweet waters, and Devtas like the fire, 
sun, moon, wind and others being ruled by Hiranyakashipu the way they are 



136 



ruled by the Hiranyagarbha*. So great was his power that even Brahmaji - 
who had given him the boon - would present himself every day, to accept 
worship from this demon. 

Naradji told Yudhishthira, "I used to go with my Veena*, with the 
Gandharvas*, to eulogize Hiranyakashipu. He had such influence that if a 
person desired to see some spectacular vision, he had only to look up at the 
sky - HHir^Hq ^T: 'naanaashcharyapadam nabhah ' - and visions would 
appear like a movie on a screen. Hiranyakashipu began to rule with 
unlimited power and glory. All the Devtas became his servants. 
Hiranyakshipu had four sons, of which Prahlad was the youngest. However, 
his virtues were the greatest. He never became unhappy in adverse 
circumstances and always respected his elders. He had goodwill for all. He 
was like an ocean of nobility, a storehouse of good qualities, and fully 
engrossed in loving the Lord. 

Despite being emperor of the three worlds, Hiranyakashipu did not arrange 
for Prahlad to be educated at home. He sent Prahlad to Shukracharya's 
Gurukul*. Prahlad did not come home often though the Gurukul was close to 
Hiranyakashipu 's palace. The two sons of Shukracharya, Shand and Amark, 
were his teachers. Prahlad lived as an ordinary student without any special 
facilities or privileges. 

Think of the situation in the affluent families these days. Tutors and 
instructors are kept to teach children at home. The children control their 
teachers, dictating terms to them and threatening them with dismissal if they 
don't comply. How can such children develop any respect for their teachers 
and how can they obtain a proper education? 

One day, Hiranyakashipu placed Prahlad affectionately on his lap and said, 
"Tell me, what is the best thing in the world?" Prahlad replied, "Father, the 
people in this world are agitated because they are trapped in the whirlpool of 
'me' and 'mine'. So, the best thing in the world is to leave everything and 
surrender to the Lord." 

Hiranyakashipu burst out laughing. "It seems my enemy has placed a spy at 
school, to spoil my son," he said. He warned the teachers and instructed 
them to keep a close watch on Prahlad in future. Prahlad was taken back to 
school. 

Back at school, the tutors questioned Prahlad about who had taught him such 
things. "Tell us whether these are your own thoughts, or has somebody been 
teaching you?" they asked. Prahlad replied, "Only the deluded people 
differentiate between 'ours' and 'others'. This faulty perception is removed 
only by the Grace of God. Just as a magnet attracts iron filings to itself, the 
Lord's wish draws my mind irresistibly to Him." 



137 



The two teachers were badly frightened. They were servants, and dependent 
upon the King. They coaxed, cajoled and threatened Prahlad. They began to 
teach him the sciences of Artha, Dharma and Kama. 

When some time elapsed and Prahlad had learnt the four methods of 
dealings - sama*, dama*, danda* and bheda* - the Guru putras* took 
Prahlad to his mother Kayadhu. She lovingly bathed and dressed him, in 
beautiful garments and ornaments. The Guru putras then too Prahlad to 
Hiranyakashipu. Prahlad prostrated at his father's feet, and Hiranyakashipu 
lifted him up with both arms and hugged him. He placed the child lovingly 
on his lap and blessed him. Hiranyakashipu was overcome with emotion, 
and tears of love fell from his eyes. 

Hiranyakshipu asked Prahlad, "Tell me, my son, what is the best thing that 
you have learnt in all these days, from your Gurus?" Prahlad replied, 
"Father, I have learnt only nine things, and they are the ways of worshipping 
the Lord Vishnu: 

m^i fasifr: MK^cHH I 

S^R cRvT ^RZT SWTTrRft^W I I 

Sravanam keertanam vishnoh smaranam paadase \anam, 
Archanam vandanam daasyam sakhyamaatmanive ^danam. 
7.5.23. 

If these nine kinds of bhakti can be offered at the feet of the Lord, there is 
nothing better in this world than this." 

Hearing this angered Hiranyakashipu so much that his lips began to tremble 
with rage. He fired the Guru putras. "You are contemptible! You did not 
bother about my wishes! What have you taught my son? You are doubtlessly 
conspiring against me!" 

The terrified Guru putras replied, "King, we have not taught him all this. It is 
his own nature that he talks like that. Please do not blame us for this." 
Hiranyakashipu then asked Prahlad where he had learnt all this, if not at 
school. "Father, the people in the world are only grinding dust and chewing 
the chewed. What can they teach anyone? No teaching can force the mind to 
move towards the Lord. It is only by His Grace that the mind gets attached 
to Him. A person whose mind touches the lotus feet of the Lord is liberated 
from the bonds of birth and death." 

Hiranyakashipu was blinded by rage. He picked Prahlad up from his lap and 
threw him violently on the ground. "Take him away and kill him," he 
ordered the Daityas. "He is only fit to be killed." 



138 



At once huge, ferocious Daityas came up and began to attack Prahlad with 
trishuls*. All their efforts were futile. Hiranyakashipu then had him trampled 
by an elephant, bitten by venomous snakes, thrown down from the mountain 
top, locked him in a dark cell, made him drink poison, stopped all his food 
and water, tried to burn him in a bonfire, had him buried under blocks of ice, 
and drown in the sea. Prahlad remained completely unharmed. 
Then purohits were made to do an abhichar*, which created a demoness 
called Kritya. She ran towards Prahlad to kill him, but was threatened by the 
Lord's Chakra*, which had been appointed to protect Prahlad. She returned 
to the Brahmins who had undertaken the abhichar, and killed them. 
Prahlad came running up, when he heard that the Brahmins had been killed. 
He prayed earnestly, 'If my heart has been totally free of ill will, please let 
these Brahmins return to life." The power of Prahlad's equanimity brought 
the Brahmins back to life. 

Hiranyakashipu was very worried to see and hear this. He began to think, 
"Prahlad definitely has some divine powers. Neither does he die, nor does he 
threaten anyone. There is no limit to his incredible ability." 
Hiranyakashipu was engrossed in these thoughts, when Shand and Amark 
came to him. They said, "Sir, there is no need to worry. Prahlad is still just a 
child. We will take him with us again. It is possible that our father, 
Shukracharya, will return form his trip, and Prahlad will be cured by his 
influence. The intellect is often purified as a child grows and serves seniors." 
Hiranyakashipu accepted this suggestion and told them to tutor Prahlad so 
that he becomes fit to marry and rule. Shandamark* took Prahlad to the 
Gurukula again, and began to teach him the sciences of Dharma, Artha and 
Kama. 

None of this had the slightest affect on Prahladji. On the contrary, he 
influenced all the children of the daityas studying there. They would 
surround Prahlad and he would give sermons. The chanting of the Lord's 
name became the school routine. Prahlad said, 

^far "TPJ^" ^PT rf^^cFTS^T I I \a£.%. 

Kciumaara aachare ^tpraagyo dharmaan bhaavataaniha, 
Durlabham maanusham janma tadapyadhruvamarthadam. 
7.6.1. 

"My friends, wise people should worship the Lord from the very childhood, 
because old people become incapable of bhakti. The only true success is to 
obtain the shelter of the Lord's feet in the present life. The Lord is the 



139 



Master of all creatures. He is the well wisher, lover and Atma of all. People 
do not understand what will benefit and what will harm, when they are 
young. They idle away their days in frivolous activities. When old age 
comes, they lack the strength to do anything. The short period in between is 
spent in fulfilling various desires. So, we should not waste any time. We 
should begin to do bhajan of the Lord." 

The Daitya children were amazed to hear Prahlad's talk. "Brother Prahlad," 
they asked, "you have been with us all the time. Then from where did you 
get this knowledge?" 

Prahlad told them, 'When Hiranyaksha was killed and my father, 
Hiranyakashipu went away to do tapasya, the Devtas seized the opportunity 
to attack the Daityas. The Asuras fled hither and thither in panic. The Devtas 
captured my mother, who was pregnant, and were taking her away, when 
they met Naradji. Naradji rescued my mother, and took her to his ashram. 
He gave her the boon of iccha prasuti*, told her the Bhagwat Dharma, and 
told her to live there in peace till her husband returned. My mother forgot 
Naradji' s sermon on the Bhagwat Dharma, but I listened from inside her 
womb, and remember all I heard." 

The Daitya children were even more impressed when they heard this. The 
entire school followed Prahlad's suggestions. Prahlad said - 

Koatiprayaasoasurabaalakaa hareVupaasane^ sve^ hridi chidravat satah, 
Svastyaatmanah sakhyurashe^shade^hinaam saamaanyatah kirn 
vishayopapaadaanaih. 
7.7.38. 

"My dear brothers, there is not the slightest difficulty in worshipping the 
Lord. He is seated in our hearts, just as there is an inner sky in our hearts. He 
is our Atma, our friend, our Master, and our All. There is nothing but Him. 
Then, where is the difficulty in worshipping Him?" 

When the teachers saw that all the students were influenced by Prahlad, and 
had become devoted to the Lord, they felt very nervous. They went to 
Hiranyakashipu and reported everything to him. 

Hiranyakashipu 's anger knew no bounds. He decided to kill Prahlad himself. 
He summoned the child and rebuked him harshly. 'You fool! You have 
become absolutely audacious! Not only are you depraved, you want to spoil 
the other children of our clan! I will send you to Yamaraj immediately! Tell 
me - on whose strength did you ignore my orders?" 



140 



Prahlad folded his hands respectfully, and answered: 



A/a ke\alan me' bhavatashcha raajan sa vai balam balinaam 
chaapare ^shaam, 

Pare^avare^amee sthirajangamaa ye^ brahmaadayo ye^na vasham 
praneetaah. 7.8.8. 

"King, the Lord controls all creation, from Brahma to the smallest blade of 
grass. The strength in all is His strength. There is no difference in the way 
He views the Brahmins, Kshatriyas*, Vaishyas*, Sudras*, Devtas, Daityas, 
dharmaatmas* and paapatmas*. He is everybody's Atma. He is my strength, 
He is your strength, and He is the strength of all." 

Prahlad' s words infuriated Hiranyakashipu further. "Where is your 
Ishwara?" he demanded. "Let me see Him! If He is everywhere, where is He 
in this pillar?" saying this, Hiranyakashipu struck the pillar with his fist. 
The pillar broke with a thunderous crack. The Lord emerged from it in the 
form of Narasimha*. In South India, they say that for the sake of His 
devotee, the Lord made wood His father! Hiranyakashipu began to battle 
with the half lion, half man form of the Lord. Ultimately, the Lord 
Narasimha caught hold of Hiranyakashipu and took him to the doorstep - 
neither indoors, nor outdoors. He placed the Daitya King on His knee - 
neither up nor down. It was twilight - neither day nor night. Apart from this, 
Lord Narasimha was neither a man nor an animal; nor had Brahmaji created 
Him. All Hiranyakashipu 's conditions were kept intact. The Lord Narasimha 
was beyond all factors. He ripped open Hiranyakashipu 's stomach with His 
claws, pulled out the intestines and wore them like a garland. The scene was 
unique and astounding. Still seething with anger, the Lord Narasimha went 
and sat on Hiranyakashipu 's throne. 

The question crops up as to why the Lord Narasimha sat on 
Hiranyakashipu 's throne. He sat because it was on this throne that He 
wanted Prahlad to sit. How could Prahlad sit on a throne sullied by 
Hiranyakashipu? So, the Lord sat on it, and made the throne His prasaad*. 
All the Devtas eulogized the Lord one by one, thanking Him profusely for 
having killed Hiranyakashipu. Some were glad that they would now receive 
a portion of the Yagya offerings, and some were relieved that they would no 
longer need to serve Hiranyakashipu. Thus, the Devtas spoke of all the 
benefits they had accrued from Hiranyakashipu 's death. 



141 



Even after all this while, the Lord Narasimha's rage had not subsided. The 
Devtas asked Laxmiji* to go and cool Him down, but she was too frightened 
of this ferocious form 

Saakshaachshreeh pre ^shitaa de \airdrishtvaa tanmahadadbhutam, 
Adrishtaashrutapoorvatvaat saa nopeyaaya shankitaa. 7.9.2. 

Laxmiji began to wonder whether it really was the Lord, or whether it was 
someone else who had taken on this fearsome form. She feared that this 
angry lion would eat her up, or tear her apart with His claws. She did not 
venture near the Narsimha Lord, despite all the appeals of the Devtas. 
Then Brahmaji told Prahlad, "Son, just see - the Lord Narasimha is angry 
with your father. Go to Him, and calm Him down." 

Prahladji went and prostrated at the Lord's feet. The Lord Narasimha 
immediately picked him up and placed him on His lap. His eyes became 
tender, and He began to lick Prahlad. Then He said, "Prahlad, you have such 
a tender body, you are so young, and yet these cruel Asuras tortured you 
mercilessly! My dear Prahlad, I delayed in coming. Forgive Me." 
Prahlad stood up and began to praise the Lord. "Lord," he said, "I know 
Your nature. It is not what a person has - wealth, good lineage, beauty, 
ascetic strength, learning, personality, influence, power, strength, manliness, 
wisdom and luxury - even if a Brahmin has all these twelve qualities, You 
do not feel satisfied with him. However, if even the lowest of the lowly have 
devotion for You in their hearts, You are satisfied with them. You were 
satisfied with Gajendra. I am so pitiable, so lowly, bereft of virtues, not from 
a good lineage, and ignorant - yet I have received so much Grace from 
You!" 

Prahlad said some startling things after this. The Shrimad Bhagwat contains 
many stutis* about the Lord's nature, benevolence, qualities and Leela, 
spoken by great people like Bhishma, Brahma, Akrura, the Vedas, and 
others, but Prahlad' s description of the essence of the Lord is outstanding. 
Prahlad said, "Lord, when one gets the awareness that nothing exists but 
God, there remains no need to say anything." 

Aadyantavanta urugaaya vidanti hi tvaame\am vimarishya sudhiyo 

viramanti shabdaat. 

7.9.49. 



142 



You see, the social angle is different, the political angle is different, material 
and Vedic viewpoints are also different. The viewpoint pertaining to the 
Lord, however, is such that there is no competitiveness, no fault finding, no 
rejection and no ego. When one is filled with love for the Lord, one 
experiences that the body is serving Him in all; the sense organs all 
experience Him; the heart is filled with universal benevolence; thinking has 
discrimination; and the individual ego is dissolved. The Mahatmas thus 
united with the Paramatma, see the Lord everywhere and in every situation. 
They are never affected by negativity. Nor do they feel any need to say 
anything. 

The Lord was pleased by Prahlad's stuti, and told him to ask for a boon. 
Prahlad said, "Lord, You tell me to ask for a boon. But - is my love for you 
motivated by a desire to obtain something? Do You have even the slightest 
wish to procure any service from me?" 

^ TRTt?T ^ °hlHHi °Ki*d ^R^T I 

wht ^\ ^r*t i i \s.i°.^ 

Aham tvakaamastvadbhaktastvam cha svaamyanapaashrayah, 

Naanyathe ^haavayorartho raajase \akayoriva. 

Yadi raaseesha me " kaamaanaam varaanstvam varadarshabha, 

Kaamaanaam hridyasanroham bhavatastu vrine " varam. 

7.10.6-7. 

"Lord, I am your nishkam* servant and You are my nishkam Master. Our 
relationship is not like the relationship of a King and his servants. Under the 
circumstances, there is no need for any boon. Still, my most generous Lord, 
if You desire to grant me anything I ask for, then grant that I never ever have 
any desire to ask for anything. Just as there is no desire in my heart today, let 
there never be any desire in my heart. Lord, if You feel it incumbent upon 
You to grant me a boon, then I ask for the good of my father, 
Hiranyakashipu, who always spoke ill of You. Let all parts of his body be 
benefited. Let all his sense organs be benefited, and let the five elements of 
his body be benefited, too. Let his subtle body be benefited, and his 
jeevatma* be benefited." The Lord told Prahlad that because of him, all had 
benefited and received salvation. 



143 



The Lord Narasimha then carried out Prahlad's crowning ceremony. When 
Brahmaji came near, the Lord admonished him for granting boons 
unthinkingly. He warned Brahmaji to never repeat the mistake. 
The entire creation was happy and prosperous, when Prahlad became the 
ruler. He was King of the Daityas. Indra was King of the Devtas, and 
humans ruled the earth. The next episode will come tomorrow. 

Om Shantih! Shantih! Shantih! 



144 



BHAGWATAMRIT 

Pravarchan VII. 
(Skandha VII & VIII) 



Yesterday I spoke of some episodes from the seventh Skandha. Of the 
fifteen chapters this contains, the first five are adhyatmik*, the middle five 
are adhidaivik*, and the last five are adhibhautik*, meaning that they apply 
to our daily lives. The main text of the Gita fives five points, and these five 
chapters pertain to them. 

Aadhishthaanam tathaa kartaa karanam cha prithagvidhyam, 
Vividhaashcha prithak che ^shtaa daivam chaivaatra panchamam. 
Gita, 18.14. 

Yudhishthira heard Naradji describe the stuti of Prahlad, and how the Lord 
frees us from all desires. Wanting to know more about Dharma, 
Yudhishthira placed some more questions. It is important to develop Dharma 
Shakti* in our lives. Unless this is developed, a person is liable to say and do 
whatever he desires impulsively. Dharma is the ability to evaluate what 
ought to be spoken, and what should not be said; what should be done, and 
what should never be done. 3Hlfad4l<^HlRd ^?WT WW 
"Anauchityaadrite^ naasti rasabhangasya kaaranam' - when a person's 
speech is inappropriate and actions are improper, his life will cease to be 
joyful. 

It is necessary, there, to evaluate and control our impulses, if we are to 
retain control over our sense organs and lives. 

Yathaa hi malinairvastraih yatra tatropavishyate \ 
E\am chalitavrittastu vritrashe^sham na rakshati. 

A person whose clothes are soiled will not be particular about the cleanliness 
of his chair, similarly, when a person gives up his ethics, he is no longer 



145 



bothered about how badly he behaves. Self control, discipline and codes of 
conduct are essential if our lives are to be filled with peace and pleasure; 
ruled by ethics rather than by urges! 

The Varna Dharma* is described first, followed by the Ashrama Dharma*. 
Varna does not mean jaati*. Jaati is grouped according to form, for example, 
the animals, birds, insects, humans and others. 

The meaning of Varna is - varnanaat varnah ' - that which is 

proved as per the descriptions in the shastras. Similarly, Ashrama means the 
division of shrama*. The syllable 'aa' in A+shrama is to indicate its 
parameters. There are four Ashramas - Brahmacharyashrama*, 
Grihashtashrama*, Vanaprasthashhrama* and Sanyashrama*. Each Ashrama 
has its own Dharma, and the religious texts have defined the appropriate 
activities and attitudes for them. 

The Varna and Ashrama Dharmas are given for worldly as well as other- 
worldly benefits. They benefit us in the present life and also after death. 
They also help us to understand the philosophy of spirituality - paramartha*. 
All these factors have been considered in the outlining of these arrangements 
of Varna and Ashrama. 

There are four Varnas - Brahmin*, Kashtriya*, Vaishya* and Shudra*. Each 
Varna has its designated duties. As described in the Gita, the Brahmin 
should practice shama-dama*. The Kshatriya should have aishwarya*, 
veerya*, aastikya*, etc. The duties of the Vaishya are farming, protecting 
cows, trading, etc. The Gita makes no mention of money lending, but 
according to the Bhagwat, it is not improper for a Vaishya to charge a 
reasonable interest in course of trading. Service to others is the main duty of 
a Shudra. 

The duties of the different Varnas are graded in keeping with natural 
tendencies and aptitudes, which indicate which career is best for the person. 

Svabhaavagunaarge^namaarge^na punsaam maargo vibhidyate\ 

The Dharma for women is unique. According to the Bhagwat, a woman 
should look after all kinds of work. She should be trustworthy, and love her 
husband with the kind of devotion given to the image of the Lord. Our 
natural love is always for our Atma. Love for others is generally in keeping 
with accepted norms. Religion has dictated that a wife's love be bound to 
her husband, for the sake of decorum and restraint. It is said - *TT ^ ^T^TT^T 
'yaa naaree haribhaave^na' - the woman who worships the Lord in the 
form of her husband achieves salvation. 



146 



According to the Ashrama Dharma, a Brahmchari's primary duty if to serve 
his Guru, because he gains vidya* by the Grace of his Guru. The Grihastha 
is expected to undertake all appropriate activities with an attitude of serving 
the Lord through them. The practice of sacrificing one's personal 
preferences, and simplifying the lifestyle, are the duties of the Vanaprastha. 
Giving up everything - 'tyaga'- is the duty of a Sanyasi. 
The Shrimad Bhagwat gives an extraordinary rider, which may be seen in 
the Mahabharata. It is not seen elsewhere. That is - 

Yasya yallakshanam proktam punso varnaabhivyanjakam, 
Tadanyatraapi drishyate " tat te ^naiva vinirdishe V. 
7.11.35. 

This means that to finally decide which Varna a person actually belongs to, 
one should see his innate tendencies. His natural inclinations and aptitudes 
are the ultimate indications of his Varna, even if he is born in a family of 
another Varna. So, if a person of any other Varna has the inherent qualities 
of a Brahmin, he should be considered a Brahmin. 

In defining Sanyas, it is said that there is a Vividisha Sanyas, and a Vidvat 
Sanyas. Vividisha Sanyas is when a person is completely detached from the 
world and has an intense desire to know the ultimate Knowledge. Vidvat 
Sanyas is the total renunciation after acquiring the ultimate knowledge. Veer 
Sanyas is a third kind, which entails walking into the Himalayas to die. 
Atur* Sanyas is the fourth kind, granted to a person on his death bed. Thus, 
many kinds of Sanyas have been described. 

While on this topic of renunciation, Naradji told Yudhishthira about the 
episode of the avadhoota*. Prahladji's wanderings brought him to the banks 
of the river Cauvery, passing through the chain of mountains. He saw a 
robust, carefree person lying on the dusty ground. Prahladji went up to him 
and bowed respectfully. Then he said, "Sir, it seems you do no work, you 
just lie here, like a carefree elephant enjoying the river. To obtain pleasure, 
we need wealth, and wealth is obtained by effort. Wealth does not come to 
the lazy. WIPh ^ifw^^T wft: ' Udyoginam purushasim hamupaiti laxmih ' 
- Laxmi comes to the one who works. It does not seem as though you do any 
work, or possess any wealth. How is it that you are so robust and carefree?" 
No ordinary man can talk to a satpurush* in this manner. He would fear the 
wrath of the man of Truth. However, godly men do not get angered, and nor 
does a woman devoted to her husband curse anyone. Sadhus* never hurt 



147 



anyone - W$ ct Ffa H =m<*i FRl" 'saadhu te " hoye " na kaaraja haani '. Then, 
Prahladji was also a devotee of the Lord, and had His Grace. 
The avadhoota was pleased with the questions placed by Prahladji. The 
avadhoota was none other than the Lord, in the form of Dattatreya. 
Dattatreya's name comes in the first Skandha of the Bhagwat. It is stated 
that the Lord took on the form of Dattatreya and gave sermons on tattvagnan 
to Prahlad and others. 

The avadhoota said, "Prahlad, I am pleased to hear your question - 
-H^icHWlfe ^TR sambhaavaneeyohi bhavaan ' - I shall show you deference, 
since your heart is filled with so much devotion for the Lord." 
Remember one thing. What would you do, if you wanted to clean your 
clothes? Suppose you put them into a fire - would they be cleaned or would 
they be burnt? They would be burnt. So, to clean our clothes, we have to 
immerse them in hot water, and dry them, and then iron them to remove the 
creases. So, to purify our Antahkaran*, we cannot pour gnanagni* directly 
into it. The way to purify the Antahkaran is that the iron of Bhakti should be 
heated by the gnanagni, and then put to practical use. When knowledge 
comes into our lives, this way, it succeeds in purifying our mind and 
character. 

The avadhoota said, "Brother Prahlad, at times I sleep on the ground, and at 
times I sleep in a palace. Sometimes I wear good clothes and sometimes I 
wear tattered rags. One day I may eat dry, unappetizing food, and one day, a 
sumptuous meal. I rejoice in whatever I get. I am completely indifferent to 
whether people recognize me or not, insult me or show respect. 
hmnhm^I-kj^^ 'Maanapamaanayostulyam' - respect and insult are all the 
same for me. I am aware that nothing exists but the Brahman. The whole 
prapancha* appears to be real only because our ego is attached to this petty 
body. The world seems real because we believe the body to be real. We will 
realize that the whole world is a mirage only when we see the body and 
mind - and the world they exist in - as being nothing more than an illusion 
based upon the substratum of its own non-existence. An item which 
shimmers like a lake in the desert is not a reality. Because of this, I do not 
believe in the existence of anything in the world. I am established in an 
unbroken state of bliss." 

Prahlad was delighted with this answer from the avadhoota. He bowed down 
once again, and went on his way. 

Listening to this episode, Yudhishthira began to wonder whether a Grihastha 
could attain such a state of bliss. He asked Naradji, "Sir, can a householder 
attain such a lofty state?" 



148 



Grihastha e^taam padavim vidhinaa ye^na chaanjasaa, 
Yati de\arishe^ broohi maadrisho grihamoodhadheeh. 
7.14.1. 

Naradji replied, "A householder should carry out his assigned duties. None 
of the Ashramas, Varnas, work or attitudes is inferior, if they are undertaken 
as a worship of the Lord. Before you do anything, reflect upon your reasons 
for doing what you wish to do. It is very dangerous to undertake anything 
without considering the probable consequences. A man must evaluate the 
consequences of each action, and embark upon them only after he has 
weighed all the possible effects. 

A householder should keep the company of people who love the Lord. He 
should be free of worldly attachments and aversions, and strive to have an 
experience of the Lord. He should also worship - vShi-hWi *1FFJ#T 'upaaseeta 
mahaamuneen ' - the mahamunis*, and follow the excellent inspirations they 
give. Worldly items are transient. Obtaining them will not bring you to the 
state you seek. You should, therefore, have a filial affection for all creatures 
- even worms, moths, lice, bed bugs, mosquitoes and the like." 

Mrigoshtrakharamarkaarkhu - sareesripkhagamakshikaah, 
Aatmanah putravat pashye ^ttaire ^shaamantaram kiyat. 
7.14.9. 

The Bhagwat says things which seem frightening to householders. However, 
the person who desires the blissful freedom of an avadhoota, will have to 
develop certain changes in his attitude. The shloka* just prior to the one I 
have just spoken, is: 

Yavadbhriye ^ta jatharam taavat svatvam hi de ^hinaam, 
Adhikam yoabhimanye V sa ste ^no dandamarhati 
7.14.8. 



149 



Naradji said "Yudhishthira, the only food which really belongs to you is the 
food which suffices to fill your stomach. Anyone who feels that he is the 
owner of anything more, is a thief, liable for punishment." 
A householder will not be troubled overmuch by loss and profit if he 
cultivates this kind of an attitude. Otherwise wealth is a cause of suffering. 
Earning is difficult, one is sad if wealth is stolen, or taken away by relatives. 
It will continue to be a source of sorrow for as long as you consider that it 
belongs to you. That is why the great thinkers have advised us to remain 
within ethical parameters. 

You heard what the Bhagwat has to say about wealth. Now see what the 
Manusmriti* says: 

Aadaananityaachchaadaaturaahare^daprayacchatah, 
Tathaa yashoasya prathate " dharmashchaiva pravartate \ 

This means that if a person accumulates wealth and never uses it to help 
anyone, then the Government has the moral right to take it away from him, 
and use it to help the needy. A King will be praised for doing this, and his 
Dharma will increase. 

Medhatithi has written a commentary upon this verse, which says - 
-HictafuichlszFT ' saarvavarnikoayam ' - that even if it is a Brahmin who does 
this, the wealth should be taken away. The Lord created wealth for the 
welfare of the people. It was not created to be buried underground, or hidden 
away. It is to be utilized for the welfare of all. 

The Shrimad Bhagwat has another exceptional message, which may not be 
very pleasing to the rigidly orthodox. It states that a householder should 
serve a guest wholeheartedly. 

cRzri" 7^ ferct ^Tin^^^T facT: I I 

Aashvaadhaante ^avasaayibhyah kaamaansanvibhaje ^dyathaa, 
Apye ^kaamaatmano daaraam nrinaam svatvagraho yatah. 
Jahyaadyarthe " svapraanaanhanyaad vaa pitaram gurum, 
Tasyaam svatvam striyaam jahyaad yaste^na hyajito jitah. 



150 



7.14.11-12. 



Naradji indicates that a family man should also ask his wife and children to 
serve the guest. He should not be too attached to his wife. If a householder 
can lead a life of detachment and service, he can win over the Lord. 
Naradji emphasized the need for a householder to carry out his duties. 
"These include doing sharddha* for the departed relatives. Kaimutik* logic 
establishes that since a son is to revere his elders even after they die, it is 
natural that he should be expected to serve them when alive. A son shows 
his gratitude for his parents, even after having inheriting their wealth, by 
doing nothing to sully their reputation. Doing shraddha purifies the mind and 
helps also, to strengthen belief in life after death. 

Other duties of a householder include arranging for the education of 
Brahmins and seeing to it that all their needs are met. This is an important 
aspect of a householder's duties, since it helps to maintain the continuity of 
our culture. Householders should also go on pilgrimages and obtain the 
company of godly people. They should celebrate special occasions, by 
worshipping the idol of the Lord. While one can worship the Lord in any 
form, the human body is a special temple - rTRTT ^ ^fte^ ftraT 'taasaam me^ 
paurushee priyaa '. The human body is dear to the Lord, and He abides in 
every heart. Social service is, therefore, a greater form of worship than ritual 
worship. Social service should be free from all differences of caste, Varna, 
religious sect, women, men, etc. The heart should be free of partiality or 
favoritism, physical violence should be avoided, and - as far as possible - 
peace and goodwill should be spread. There is no greater worship of the 
Lord than this. 

"Yudhishthira, before the Treta Yuga*, the Lord was worshipped in humans. 
The people's faith grew weak and they became critical of others. They 
would worship, but they would also criticize. The Mahatmas then thought 
over the matter and came to the conclusion that it is best that people worship 
an image, which they can always revere. However, even the worship of the 
idol will never bear fruit if people simultaneously hold a hatred for fellow 
beings." 

Upaasata upaastaapi naarthadaa purushadvishaam. 
7.14.40. 

Naradji continued, "Yudhishthira, this whole creation is the shadow of the 
Paramatma. It is just like the shadow of a tree. The shadow does not have a 



151 



separate identity. It lengthens in the mornings and evening, and shortens at 
midday, and disappears if no one stands in the sun. It is not possible for the 
shadow to exist without the man, since it is not separate from the man. 
However, inspite of its being inseparable, from the person it belongs to, the 
shadow saves others from the hot sun. It remains attached to its origin even 
while having a separate affect. In the same way, the shadow of this world is 
not separate from the Lord. 

silcntw fspqiitf sMild cT«TTSSc*FT: I 

Bhaavaadvaitam kriyaadvaitam dravyaadvaitam tathaatmanah, 
Vartayasvaanubhootyeha treensvapnaandhunute " munih. 
7.15.62. 

There are three kinds of advaita*. Bhavadvaita*, kriyadvaita*, and 
dravyadvaita*. Bhavadvaita is when a person cultivates goodwill for all 
creatures. When all one's actions are offered up to the Lord, it is called 
Kriyadvaita, and dravyadvaita is when one feels that everything belongs to 
the Lord, W H 'Aham e ^tam na ' - "this is not me, and this is not mine." 
Then, "Whose is it?" "The whole world belongs to him, of whom I am just a 
particle." 

Naradji explained what is meant by Dharmabhas*. He said that it is 
Dharmabhas, when guidance is being given to some other person, and we 
begin to practice it ourselves. It is cheating to deliberately mislead anybody, 
and it is vidharma* to hinder anybody's worship - ^pt^fr "^TRT 
' dharmabaadho vidharmah syaat. ' If we undertake an anushthaan for the 
sake of hindering another person's worship, it becomes an irreligious action. 
Then Naradji spoke about the subtleties of Dharma, Dharmabhas, vidharma, 
ethics, etc. to Yudhishthira. He told him how he (Naradji) was a Gandharva 
in his past life. "I had all the facilities for sensual pleasures, plenty of wealth, 
and much luxury," he said. "However, I misbehaved with a Mahatma, and 
became a Shudra as a result of his curse. As a Shudra, however, I was 
fortunate to get the proximity of Mahatmas and serve them. I did bhajan. As 
a result of bhajan, the Lord made me His attendant. Now, I play the veena* 
and wander where I please. 

Quarrelling in the name of religion - so common today - is never for basic 
Dharma. People quarrel because they wish to impose the strictures of their 
country, time, teacher, etc. Just as the matter in all is one, the basic precepts 
of religions are common for mankind. They contain no contentious issues. 



152 



Ultimately, Naradji told Yudhishthira earnestly, how fortunate they were, 
that the Lord stayed with them in a human form. "Great sages come to your 
house, to get a glimpse of the Lord, and you get to meet these great 
devotees! He, whose birth and actions cannot be described adequately by 
even Shankar and Brahmaji and others, stays in your house as a relative. 
How compassionate and gracious He is!" 

Naradji departed when he had answered all Yudhishthira' s questions. Shri 
Shukadevji Maharaj concluded the seventh Skandha, and used Raja 
Parikshit's question to embark on the eighth Skandha. This is called the 
Saddharma Skandha. It contains twenty four chapters. The first chapter 
described the Manvantaras*. Three chapters after this give the story of the 
elephant and the crocodile. The next ten chapters describe the facilities and 
jewels the Lord has given us. The following nine chapters describe the ways 
in which men worship the Lord. The last chapter explains how the 
philosophy of the Vedas is established as being accurate and authentic. 
With regard to the description of the Manvantaras, I wish to remind you of 
the fifth Skandha, and the description it contains of how - when we begin to 
seek the end of the four directions, and above and below, and attempt to 
reach an understanding of the Paramatma-tattva* which upholds everything 
- then we get a glimmer of how all pervading the Lord is. In the same way, 
when we begin to try and measure time, we realize that the Kaliyuga* is 
about four and a half million years. The Dvapar Yuga* is twice as long. 
Treta is three times as long as Dvapar and Satya Yuga is four times the 
length of Treta. Combining all four, we get a chaturyugi*. Seventy one 
chaturyugis make a Manvantara. Next comes a Kalpa, then Mahakalpa, and 
the Maha Pralay*. These calculations are given to explain that the Lord is 
unaffected by Time and Space, and is all-pervading. 

At the beginning of the eighth Skandha, Shri Shukadevji answered Raja 
Parikshit by telling him that Swayambhuva Manu told his sons to rule the 
world. He then went off, with his wife Shatroopa, into the forest, and began 
to do japa. His mantra was: 

Aatmaavaasyamidam vishvam yat kinchijjagatyaam jagat, 
Te ^na tyakte ^na bhunjeethaa ma gridhah kasyasviddhanam. 
8.1.10. 



153 



The same mantra is given in the Upanishad. ^iicn-wFHq "^f^T 'Ishavasyamidam 
sarvan' comes in the Upanishad, and fera^r 
' aatmaavaasyamidam vishvam ' comes in the Bhagwat. The rest is identical. 
This means - fill the universe with your Atma. All the others feel the same 
kind of joy and sorrow as you do. 

When Manuji was engrossed in chanting, the Asuras came with the intention 
of killing him. The Lord, however, manifested and killed them. The demonic 
tendency of the demons was destroyed, and Manu - the representative of 
humane values - was saved. 

Shri Shukadevji mentioned the second, Svaarchish Manu, the third, Uttam 
Manu, and the fourth, Tapas Manu, and then their descendents. 
He then spoke of Gajendra*, and how he was a King named Indradyumna, in 
his past life. 

It was Indradyumana's practice to worship the Lord. Once, when he was 
seated in worship, the most enlightened Mahatma Agastya came to visit him. 
He sent a servant, who told the Mahatma to wait outside until the King had 
completed his pooja*. Agastya waited for the King to be free, and then 
entered. However, the King did not extend the courtesy of arising and 
bowing down to welcome the Mahatma. Agastyaji gave him a curse, saying, 
"Since you behave like an imperious elephant, become one." 
Even as an elephant, the King had all the creature comforts, since he had 
worshipped the Lord. There were great lakes, plenty of fruits and vegetation 
of all kinds, etc. he had many female elephants, and their calves, and the 
calves of his sons. One day, he went into a lake. A crocodile, who lived 
there, caught his foot. 

A man's arrogance is always broken, sooner or later. It breaks when a 
graha* enters his life. A person who has duragraha* is humbled. Vinay* 
protects self respect, whereas arrogance invites insult. It is a sign of 
intelligence when a person accepts the reality. When an obstinate person 
refuses to accept reality, and insists upon having his way - disregarding 
good advice - his life will be filled with wrong actions. The actual graha in 
people's lives is the duragraha and vigraha*. Other grahas are in the sky, but 
the grahas of duragraha and vigrahas stay in the mental sky. The story of 
Gajendra-graha is, therefore, particularly significant for people in the world. 
Not all Gajendra 's strength could save him from the jaws of the graha. The 
male and female elephants of his herd all came to his aid, twining their 
trunks round his legs and tail, trying to pull him back, without success. 
When Gajendra realized that he was about to drown, the recollection of his 
past life flashed into his mind, because the Lord's worship is never in vain. 
He lifted a lotus with his trunk, and raised it up to the Lord, with a prayer. 



154 



ft^wNt ^diq*W 'Nishe ^dhashe ^sho jayaataadashe ^shah ' - everything can 
be denied, except the Paramatma. Had the Paramatma been another, He 
would not be with us when we sleep, go into a Samadhi, nor been anywhere 
at all. He would have been negated. It is possible for us to say, "Is not" for 
another, because we are not conscious of them while we sleep or meditate. 
Nor are we conscious of their existence when we are unconscious; and 
certainly not at the time of dissolution. For any other thing, we can ask the 
question, "If he exists, why am I not able to experience him?" In our own 
pratyak chaitanya*, the Atmadev* is nothing separate or different from the 
Parabrahma Paramatma*. So, it is not possible for anyone alive to declare 
that they do not exist. 

When Gajendra offered up the lotus, and praised the Lord, saying, "O 
Govind! O Govind! Protect me!" neither Brahmaji nor Shankarji came. Nor 
did the Lord Vishnu appear. The form that appeared was the four-armed 
form of the Lord which Gajendra had worshipped mentally. 
It is said that the Lord's attendant Vishvaksena, placed His sandals before 
the Lord, when He stood up to go. The Lord stepped on them so hard, that 
they broke. He pushed away His mount Garuda hastily. The Lord heard 
"Go" in Vaikuntha* and "vind" on earth, as He descended at the lake. 
The Lord said, "So what if it is a crocodile? He has caught the foot of My 
devotee. So, first of all I will liberate the devotee of My devotee. After that, I 
will liberate My devotee." He brought Gajendra out, and gave liberation to 
the crocodile. 

This was no ordinary crocodile. He had been a Gandharva in his past life, 
and had once mocked an ugly Mahatma by pulling his leg. The Mahatma 
had given him a curse, saying he would become a crocodile. Thus, both 
King Indradyumna and the Gandharva had been guilty of misbehaving with 
Mahatmas, and had been turned into Gajendra and the crocodile 
respectively. 

The Lord liberated both, the one who was caught and the one who caught, 
were freed from curses. The nature of the Lord is completely free of 
differentiation of acquirements - non-acquirements, receiver - non-receiver, 
etc. So, He liberated both the elephant and the crocodile. 
The next story is about Durvasaji finding a garland of fresh lotus flowers, 
and wanting to bestow it on Indra. By chance, Indra came down the same 
road, riding his elephant, Airavat. Durvasa garlanded Indra, as planned. 
Indra, however, did not realize the importance of this garland - or perhaps 
he was too intoxicated with his own power and position to bother. He took 
off the garland, and put it round the head of Airavat, who promptly tore it off 
with his trunk and trampled upon it. All this happened in a flash, while 



155 



Durvasa watched. Durvasa felt insulted. "You have insulted the sanctified 
garland I bestowed upon you, so become Laxmirahit* - ft:3Tfarr ^TR 
'nihshreeko bhavaan '. " 

As a result of this curse, Indra lost his throne. The world was bereft of 
beauty and prosperity, and Bali became King of heaven! All the Devtas went 
to Brahmaji and Shankarji. Then they all got together and did stuti of the 
Lord. 

You will note that all the stutis have this in common, that they say, "Lord, 
You are the earth, water, fire, wind, sky, Sun and Moon, and You are the 
mana*, buddhi*, chitta* and ahankar*. Brahma, Shiva and the others said a 
similar stuti. The Lord manifested in His four-armed form. Brahma and 
Shankar could see the Lord, but the eyes of the Devtas were too dazzled to 
see Him. They just eulogized Him and placed their problem. 
The Lord said, "Brahmaji, Shankarji and Devtas - it is not possible that I 
favor you upon every occasion. It is not to anybody's credit if they need 
outside help to deal with their enemy. At present, Bali is well established in 
Dharma. Even Ishwara cannot put aside a person who treads the path of 
righteousness. So, it is only proper that you go to Bali, unarmed, and seek to 
have a Treaty with him - ^#rak?TFr 'sandhirvidheeyataam '. If our enemy 
is very strong, it is wise to have a Treaty. Agree with whatever the Asuras 
say, for the time being. Peaceful negotiation can achieve everything, but 
getting angry achieves nothing." The Lord then taught them all the methods 
of making a Treaty. 

When the Asuras saw the Devtas approach unarmed, their first impulse was 
to imprison them. Bali forbade them, saying it would tarnish his reputation, 
and they were quiet. 

The Devtas reached Bali and discussed the treaty with him. It was decided 
that the ksheer sagar* should be jointly churned, and the amrit* which would 
emerge, be shared by all. Everyone would become immortal after drinking 
it. 

They decided to use the Mandarachala mountain as the mathani*, and the 
serpent Vasuki, as the neti* for churning it. However, the Devtas and the 
Daityas found that their combined strength was insufficient to shift the 
mountain. They did manage to raise it once, but it fell again, causing injury 
to the limbs of the Devtas and Daityas. 

The ksheer sagar is the sea of sattvaguna*. It is necessary that the Daivi* as 
well as the Asuri* tendencies are turned towards the Truth, before the 
manthan* can be undertaken. Only then can the highest fruit - the elixir - be 
procured. 



156 



The Devtas and Daityas remembered the Lord, when all their efforts to shift 
the mountain failed. He came, seated on the Garuda, and placed the 
Mandarachala on the Garuda' s wings. 

See what Manuji Maharaj says about Garudaji. He says that all creations and 
conditions are caused by the words of the Vedas. The words of the Vedas are 
very powerful, and Garudaji is their personification. The Lord cannot be 
reached by direct vision. Nor can He be reached by hypothesis. He is in no 
way affected by logic or intangibility. Comparison fails as far as the Lord is 
concerned, and traditional theories cannot reach Him either. The Lord is 
disclosed only through words. It is 'the word' which brings enlightenment. 
The Lord placed the Mandarachala on the wings of the word, manifested as 
Garuda, and came to the milky ocean. He pushed the mountain into the sea, 
but it would keep sinking and rising. So the Lord displayed His supportive 
power by taking on the form of a giant tortoise, and supporting the 
Mandarachala on His back. This was the Kachap Avatar*. In another form, 
He held the mountain firmly upon the back of the tortoise. Then they 
wrapped Vasuki round the mountain, because Vasuki had agreed to this, on 
condition of getting his share of the amrit. 

The Devtas went towards Vasuki 's head, and the Daityas went towards the 
tail, to start the churning. Then, the Daityas felt that it was insulting to hold 
the tail, and said, "We are the elder brothers. We will not hold the tail." The 
Devtas were unwilling to change. The Lord interceded, telling both sides not 
to permit pettiness to divert them from the main purpose. "You should 
understand the importance of the goal, and stop quibbling," He said. 
The Lord ordered the Devtas to come towards the tail and allow the Daityas 
to hold the head. The Devtas obeyed. When the manthan started, they 
understood why the Lord had told them to move. Fumes of poison emerged 
from Vasuki' s mouth, causing great discomfort to the Daityas. The Devtas, 
however, were refreshed by showers caused by the condensation of Vasuki 's 
gusts of hot breath. 

Now, listen attentively - the Lord is seated, in the form of a tortoise, 
supporting the Mandarachala on His back. He is standing, in another form, 
on top, holding the mountain down firmly. He is in all the Devtas and 
Daityas, in the form of their strength. Despite this, when the churning was 
inadequate, He took on yet another form. He caught hold of Vasuki 's tail 
with one hand, and head with the other hand. We can only imagine how vast 
the Lord is. Actually, for one who's naval holds the sky, noting can be 
considered impossible. The description of His ornaments is also given to 
indicate that He is all pervading. The Brahmalok* is in His crown, and the 



157 



earth is in His waist, and the nether lands are in His feet. Thus, the Lord's 
form is endless. 

Some obstacles were bound to arise, when the manthan started. Obstacles 
come up whenever anyone undertakes any good work - ateriftr ^|f^F#T 
'shre yaansi bahuvighnaani '. This happens to show us that success comes to 
those who persevere. When someone lacks the courage to continue in the 
face of difficulties, success begins to think, "What is the use of going to 
someone who gives up so easily?" People with worthy qualities do not give 
up their goal so easily! 

#f|TFHT H MRciMPd I ^° ?T° ^V9 

Praarabhya chottamajanaa na parityajanti '. 
Neeti Shatra. 2 7. 

So, what was the obstacle which arose when the churning began? It was 
deadly venom. It is impossible to cure certain diseases without the use of 
venom, fepsRzr Iwffwr ' Vishasya vishamaushadham ' - poison is used as an 
oshadhi* for a number of diseases. What is an oshadhi? 3ffisrfrT ^fwR ^rC 7 J tJ TR 
^fcT sftafa: 'Oshati doshaan dhatte^ gunaan iti oshadhih' - that, which 
removes faults in our lives, and induces goodness, that which supplies what 
we need, is called "oshadhi". It does three things - firstly, it removes the 
cause of the disease; secondly, it provides nourishment; and thirdly, it gives 
us what we lack. Venom is, therefore, a very valuable item. 
The Devtas and Daityas were frightened when the poison emerged. They did 
not know what would happen. They feared that the poison would burn the 
world and destroy it. 

The Lord Vishnu was busy with the manthan, but the Lord Shankar was 
seated in meditation. He was unconcerned with the Devtas and the Daityas. 
Lord Vishnu suggested that Shankarji be involved in this activity. The 
Devtas and Daityas went to Shankarji and prayed, "You are the Lord of 
Pralay*, but it is not yet the time for dissolution. This deadly poison has 
emerged before its time. Please do not allow the world to be destroyed now. 
Please save us all from this fearsome venom." 

Shankarji agreed to help them. He spoke to his wife, Gauriji, saying, "Devi*, 
our people are in peril. It is our duty to remove the cause of their fear." 
Gauriji complimented Shankarji for his kindness, and said, "Those who have 
the nature of a Sadhu*, Mahatma or Satpurush*, invariably wish to remove 
the suffering of others, by taking it upon themselves. It is the highest 



158 



worship of the Amalatma Purush* to save others from suffering by taking it 
upon one's self." 

WTTTTKR rife ^WlfeldlcHH: I I <i.Vs.XX. 

Tapyante " lokataape ^na saadhavah praayasho janaah, 

Paramaaraadhanam taddhi purushasyaakhilaatmanah. 

8.7.44. 

Encouraged by Gauriji's approval, Shankarji drank the deadly poison. The 
Mahatmas say that Shankarji gathered up all the venom, but did not allow it 
to linger on his tongue, because that is where the Lord's name is kept. If the 
name of the Lord and poison were kept together, people would lose faith in 
the name. Neither did Shankarji let the poison reach his heart, because the 
form of the Lord is seated in his heart. So, Shankarji placed the venom in his 
throat, deciding to bring it up again, and use it for dissolution, when the time 
was right. "Then, I need not use my powers of destruction," he thought. 
Shankarji' s neck turned blue with the poison, and this became a decoration - 
'taccha shambhorvibhooshanam'. If one gets a scar or a stain in the course 
of helping others, even that mark becomes a decoration. 
The second item to emerge from the ocean was the gomata*, which the 
Brahmins received. The Daityas asked for Uchchaishrava, the horse which 
emerged next, and it was given to them. The Devtas were given Airavat, the 
elephant which emerged after Uchchaishrava. 

While all this was happening, the Lord told Kaustubh*, "You have always 
clung to Me. Now, go for a sojourn." It entered the ocean, and emerged as 
Padmarag* - h^h<i'i1 wM': padmaraago mahodadhe 7z ' - and attached itself 
to the Lord again. 

The Kaustubh - or Padmarag - has no hole pierced in it. Nor does it need to 
be strung. How can anything, which clings to the Lord's chest, be less than 
perfect, and whole? The effect of being close to the Lord is to be totally free 
from bondage. 

After this, the Kalpataru* emerged, and was given to the Devtas. The 
Apsaras who came next, were also received by the Devtas. Then Laxmi 
emerged. The whole world was filled with goodness, as soon as she 
emerged. It is through Her that the Lord's Grace is given. So, as soon as she 
emerged, all the Devtas and Daityas were eager to see Her. Laxmi pacified 
them all. 

It is said, that at the time of the samudra manthan*, Laxmiji told the Lord, 
"We have always been together, since time immemorial. I am Your wife, 



159 



Laxmi, and You are my husband, Narayana. Our names are taken jointly, as 

Laxminarayana. However, my friends wish to know when we celebrate our 

wedding anniversary. Neither You, nor I, can give them an answer." 

The Lord Narayana replied, "Devi, we have an excellent opportunity today. 

Make the ocean your father, and emerge as his daughter, and we will get 

married today. People will be able to see the happy occasion of our 

wedding." 

Laxmiji agreed, and emerged from the ocean. She started a Leela of having a 
swayamvara*. Everybody was made to sit in a row. Laxmiji said that she 
would marry the one who did not desire her. "People who want me will 
cease to value me, once they have me," She said. "He who desires me only 
to fulfill his wishes, will ultimately destroy me. Only the man, who wants 
me without worldly desire, will continue to cherish me." 
Laxmiji started finding fault with the candidates. "This one has a lot of 
knowledge, but is very greedy." "This one does not keep good company." 
"This one is too old." "This one has a terrible temper," and so on. She kept 
rejecting them all, one by one. Then she glanced at the sea, and saw 
someone sleeping there. Enquiries revealed that it was the blue hued 
Narayana, who reposes in the ocean of sattvaguna*, covered by a golden 
garment, as he sleeps upon the white, milky ocean. "He did not attend the 
swayamvara because He has no desire to get married," She was told. "He is 
resting." 

Laxmiji declared that this was the one she would wed. She left everybody, 
and went to Him with the Varmala*. The Lord opened His eyes. His eyes 
met hers. They had conspired for this, and Laxmiji garlanded the Lord, and 
He placed her on His chest. The others could only watch helplessly. 
The one who emerged next was Dhanvantari. He is a gem in the form of a 
vaidya*. The Ayurveda* in his mouth is also a gem, and so is the Amrit 
Kalash* in his hand. As soon as Dhanvantari emerged, holding the Amrit 
Kalash, the Daityas snatched it away. Since there is no unity among Daityas, 
they began to quarrel among themselves. 

The Devtas were disheartened to see this. The Lord took on the form of 
Mohini*, which enchanted both the Devtas and the Daityas. The Daityas 
appealed to her, "Deviji, we brothers are quarreling among ourselves for the 
elixir. Please intercede and settle the dispute. We agree to abide by whatever 
you decide." 

Mohini said, "You do not know my background, my caste, my parentage, or 
my character. Nobody trusts an unknown harlot. Why do you trust me?" 
The Daityas replied that they did not care what she was; they would obey 
her, regardless of any consequence. 



160 



Mohini replied, "Then you will have to follow whatever I say. Nothing is to 
be done without my permission." 

They Daityas accepted her condition. Mohini told them to bathe, and do the 
Sandhya Vandan*, chant the Gayatri mantra, and sit on a grass mat generally 
used for rituals of worship. 

Even the Daityas who had not received the yagyopaveeta behaved as though 
they were initiated. They bathed, did the rituals as directed by Mohini, and 
sat in a row. The Devtas sat in a row opposite the Daityas. 
Mohini reconfirmed their willingness to accept her verdict. Everybody 
confirmed in one voice. Mohini started on the side of the Devtas. She would 
smile enchantingly at the Daityas, while giving Amrit to the Devtas, 
indicating that she would soon be with them. 

A Daitya named Rahu disguised himself, and sat down between Surya (the 
sun) and Chandra (the moon), but was soon caught out. The Lord - still in 
the form of Mohini - cut off his head with His Chakra (discus). Rahu's body 
was divided into two. One remained Rahu, and the other became Ketu. 
The Daityas realized that Mohini had been treacherous. They picked up their 
weapons and rushed to kill her. Mohini shed her wig and garments, and 
wiped off her makeup. The Narayana (who had become Mohini) vanished 
from view. 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj said, "Parikshit, even though the Daityas and the 
Devtas had put in an equal effort, it was the Devtas who received the Amrit, 
because they were guided by the Lord, and had His Grace and support. The 
Daityas - who are always opposed to the Lord - were deprived of it. The 
fact is that the side which has the Lord is the side of Truth, and the side 
away from the Lord is the side of nescience. It is Bhakti which turns us 
towards the Lord - who is Satswaroop - the existence, Chitswaroop - the 
consciousness, and Anandswaroop- bliss incarnate. When we turn towards 
the Lord, it benefits us in this world as well as in the next. 
A fierce battle raged between the Devtas and Daityas, as soon as the Lord 
vanished. Warriors from both sides used different animals and birds as their 
mounts - some even used flies and mosquitoes - during the battle. This 
Devasura sangram, as this battle is called, is remembered even today. All the 
wars which have taken place on earth have a shadow of the war between 
godly and demonic forces. 

The war was so terrible that even the Devtas who had drunk Amrit, began to 
die. The Shrimad Bhagwat describes this with absolute clarity. The question 
arose, as to why the Devtas died; they should have become immortal after 
drinking the Amrit. The answer is that the efficacy of Amrit was blocked by 
the dishonesty of the Devtas. The Amrit became impotent because the 



161 



Daityas did not receive their fair share. So, the Amrit's power of immortality 
did not work for the Devtas. 

The frightened Devtas began to worship the Lord. He appeared before them. 
The Lord had not given Amrit to the Daityas because that would have been 
like nurturing a snake. Even milk given to a snake turns into poison. The 
Amrit started to take effect as soon as the Lord appeared on the side of the 
Devtas. 

The Lord killed many Asuras with His Chakra. Indra, encouraged by the 
Lord, lifted up his Vajra and killed many demons. A celestial voice told 
Indra how to kill the Asuras who were very powerful. Indra told Bali, 
"Come before me and show how much valor you have." 
Bali replied, "Indra, victory and defeat are worldly norms - they keep 
coming in life. Why talk of them while we face each other in battle? You 
display your valor, and I will display mine." 

mfi oi^HHHi TOT 4lRcl^4u||HJ 

Sangraame " vartamaanaanaam kaala choditakarmanaam, 
Keertirjayoajayo mrityuh sarve ^shaam syuranukramaat. 
8.11.7. 

In the terrible battle which ensued, Indra shot down Bali's air plane with his 
vajra. Bali fell, unconscious, to the ground. The Daityas picked up his body 
and took it to Shukracharya. The Devtas began to kill the remaining Daityas, 
who were completely routed. 

Just then Naradji - sent by Brahmaji - arrived at the scene of the battle. He 
said, "Devtas, the Daityas and you have both always existed in the world. 
This battle has been won by you. It is not proper that you destroy the seed of 
the Daityas completely. Your virtues will be known only if Daityas exist, 
because people will be able to compare, and realize your superiority." 
Naradji is Devarshi*. He is the purohit of the Devtas, so the Devtas took his 
advice, and stopped killing the Daityas. They regained the rule of Heaven, 
and were happy once again. 

The Devtas prayed to the Lord Vishnu again, since they still feared the 
Daityas. "Lord, You have given us victory, but what will happen if the 
Daityas go to Shankarji and he grants them a boon, and supports them 
against us?" The Lord told them not to worry. 

After reassuring the Devtas, the Lord Vishnu focused upon Shankarji, and 
they had a telepathic conversation. The Lord asked Shankarji not to support 
the Daityas. He replied that it was his custom to help whoever asked for his 



162 



help. If the Daityas prayed for his help, he could not refuse. The Lord asked 
him to find a way out of this debacle. Shankarji said, "I can suggest one 
thing. Put on Your Mohini form once more, and come before me. I was not 
present when You showed this form. I was somewhat intoxicated by the 
poison I had imbued. So, please show me that form of Yours, and I will do 
as You say." 

The Mohini form manifested. Shankarji was totally bewitched. He ran naked 
after Mohini. Seeing this, the Daityas lost faith in his ability to help them. 
"He is lost to Vishnu, as it is," they thought, and abandoned all plans to seek 
Shankarji 's support. 

It would be a great mistake to harbor any doubts, regarding Shankarji. The 
Shrimad Bhagwat is a Vaishnav Purana*. That is why Vishnu is given 
greater importance here. When we use the name of any Devta, to speak 
about the Brahman, it is always the Brahman we refer to, because - t& 
^f£TT qqPi 'e^kam sadvipraa bahudhaa vadanti'. The story is narrated 
because the Brahman called Narayana was to be shown as being greater than 
the Brahman called Shiva. 

One angle to this story could be the lesson that when an atamaram* like 
Shankarji can get carried away by a woman's beauty, how can any man be 
sure of his self-control? Every man should be extra watchful on this score. 
Another lesson we get is that Shankarji is always established in his Self. His 
Self is unaffected by what happens to his mind or body. The Lord Vishnu 
has praised him lavishly for this. 

The Mahatmas have pointed out yet another significant point in this episode. 
Shankarji 's behavior was a way of throwing out the venom he had imbued, 
and make his body pure and healthy once more. 

Concluding the episode, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj spoke of the Manvantaras. 
Then he said, "Parikshit, when the Daityas carried Bali's body from the 
battlefield, to Shukracharya, he brought Bali back to life by making him 
drink the Sanjeevani. Bali became fully fit once more. He served Bhriguji 
and the Brahmins in his lineage, with great devotion. Shukracharya made 
Bali undertake a Yagya called Vishwajit*, which brought him victory 
against the Devtas once again. A divine chariot, replete with horses, 
charioteer and all types of weapons emerged from the ritual fire. The Daityas 
rallied round, and they regained the reign of Heaven. 

This is why Goswami Tulsidas says, Wte srt §<a<^ "svargaoo svalpa 
antadukhadayee '. It is the law of the world that no matter what position we 
get, we are liable to be deprived of it. The Valmiki Ramayana has this verse 



163 



OTtTT ft^TT: qcHRTT: ^^1: 1 
^TT fer^TRTT WW % 4r°lclHJ I 

Sarve " kshayaantaa nichayaah patanaantaah samucshrayaah, 
Sanyogaa viprayogaantaa maranaantaam hijeevitam. 

No matter how high a person climbs, one day he will have to fall. No matter 
what we obtain, one day it will be gone. No matter what kind of life we lead, 
one day we will die. It is inevitable that all we have gathered, will, one day, 
be scattered. 

So, Indra's kingdom was taken away one day. Bali was crowned King of 
Heaven. He started the Vishwajit Yagya, with the desire of gaining 
permanent rule over Heaven. 

Aditi, the mother of the Devtas, was deeply distressed to hear this. I have 
told you that Diti and Aditi are both Kashyap's wives. It is one Lord, who is 
the witness, and substratum, of both. Diti gave birth to the demonic forces, 
and Aditi gave birth to the godly forces, like the Sun. 

One day, Kashyapji Maharaj came to Aditi 's abode. He saw it was filled 
with gloom. Kashyapji asked, "Devi, why are you sad?" 
The question shows what the causes of sorrow in a mother of those days 
were. These were generally when a lady was unable to offer good food to 
welcome a visitor, or the inability to keep a commitment, or to worship the 
Lord. Women were sad when any of these happened. Good people are not 
saddened by personal losses. They feel dejected when their Dharma is 
harmed. 

So, when Kashyapji asked what caused her to be sad, Aditi answered, "I am 
sad because my sons are forced to flee into the forest. They do not even get 
proper food to eat. My attachment to them is the cause of my sorrow." 
Kashyapji thanked the Lord, when he heard this. "Lord, what Maya* have 
You spread over the world? All creatures succumb to it. There is a stone, 
and people call it a diamond - T TTWW^cifq- i^p§fe": 'paashanakhande "shvapi 
ratnabuddhih '. They consider a body made of flesh and blood to be theirs - 
sricR^: #^TcFiraiVI 'aatmadheeh shonitamaansapinde^ '. They consider a 
woman, made of flesh, blood and bones, to be a source of pleasure, created 
for their enjoyment! What is this Leela of Yours, my Lord - «H=iniS# 
^-^TfcTT 'vyaktaasao kaachana moha-leela '? " 

Kashyapji told Aditi about the Payovrat ritual, which starts on Falgun 
Shukla Pratipada, and ends on the eleventh day of that lunar month. The 
Lord is worshipped during this period, with the one who undertakes this, 



164 



having nothing but milk during this period. This vrat brings excellent results. 
Aditi undertook this ritual. The Lord was pleased, and appeared before her. 
The Lord manifests according to the feeling with which the devotee 
worships Him. He has no personal preference about helping anybody. He is 
willing to manifest before whoever worships Him with single minded 
devotion. He has equal goodwill for all, and is loved by all. He is 
Advaitswaroop*. Yet, when a person worships Him, He manifests to fulfill 
that person's desire - T^§wtel# 'rakshaape ^kshaamape ^kshate \ ' 
When the Lord appeared before Aditi, He said, "Devi, you have completed 
your vrat. Your desire will be fulfilled. However, be very careful, and say 
nothing about this to anyone at all, no matter who questions you. The affect 
of the Devta increases, when it is kept secret. 

town snwti "^ifa ^er^Ri 

Naitat parasmaa aakhye yam prishtayaapi kathanchana, 
Sarvam sampadyate " de \i de \aguhayam susamvritam. 
8.17.20. 

At the appropriate time, the union of Kashyap and Aditi resulted in the birth 
of Vamana* Bhagwan*. There is a mantra in the Vedas: 

t^tt faEaj: ^rrawr i 
Vaamano ha vishnuraasa, idam vishnurvichakrame " tre ^dhaa 
Nidadhe " padam vishnuh samoodhamasya paansure \ 

Who is there, who can describe the seed of Vishnu? There is a space, 
situated between the spot from where the prana* rises and descends, and the 
spot where the Apaan Vayu* moves downwards. That is where Vamana 
Bhagwan abides. 

When Vamana Bhagwan manifested, the Devtas arranged His thread 

ceremony, umbrella, the sacred thread, stick, and other items for the ritual. 

The Lord then proceeded in the direction of Bali's Yagya. 

Everybody who was present in the Yagya mandapam* was enchanted at the 

sight of Vamana. He was so beautiful, so appealing, and so impressive, that 

an emperor like Bali came out to welcome Him, bringing the ritual fire and 

Brahmins. They prayed to Vamana, to enter the spot of the Yagya. 

This indicates that one should never go uninvited to a Yagya. We should 

enter only when we are invited by the yajamaan* and Brahmins. 



165 



Vamana Bhagwan entered the Yagya shala* at their invitation. A special 
chair was placed for Him. Bali welcomed Him with great respect, and said, 
"Maharaj, you have deigned to come to the Yagya. This indicates that you 
desire something. Please ask for whatever you want. Take gold, if you want 
gold, or elephants, or land, or wealth - whatever you desire is yours for the 
asking. You are a Brahmachari. If you wish to marry a suitable young lady, 
please tell me, and I will make all the arrangements." 

Vamana said, "Bali, you speak with the same magnanimity as your 
forefathers, Truly, your response is just what I had expected. Your 
Grandfather, Prahlad, had given a judgment which went against his own son. 
You Great Grandfather, Hiranyakashipu, was so powerful that he went to 
Vaikuntha, with his gadaa*, to seek out Lord Vishnu and kill Him. Unable to 
find Him anywhere, he assumed he was dead, and went away. Your Father, 
Virochan, understood that it was his enemy who had come in the guise of a 
Brahmin, yet he gave his body, because that was what the Brahmin had 
asked for. You are truly blessed to have been born in such a noble lineage!" 
See how lavishly the one who asks, has to praise the one who gives. People 
do not give anything, until they are flattered and pampered. That is why the 
great poet Kalidasa, has said, H "stotram kasya na tushtaye^' - 

who is not pleased to receive praise? 

Bali, too, was pleased to hear Vamana' s words of praise, and reiterated his 
offer to give whatever Vamana asked for. 

Just then, Shukracharya recognized who Vamana was. He said, "Bali, this is 
Vishnu! He has come to you, to benefit the Devtas. Don't make any pledge 
to give Him anything, or else he'll snatch away everything you possess." 
Bali replied, "Guruji Maharaj, from the worldly angle, you are quite right in 
telling me to withdraw from my promise. One's situation does become a 
problem when one gives away all one has. Life becomes filled with danger. I 
will become absolutely poor. However, how is it possible that Bali, the 
Grandson of Prahlad, takes a vow in the Yagya bhoomi*, and then backs 
out? The greatest burden for the Earth, is that of the people who break their 
pledge. I can give up everything I possess, including my life, but I cannot 
break a pledge once I have given it." As Bali disobeyed him, Shukracharya 
got angry with him, and said that he would become a pauper. 
There is no doubt that Shukracharya has more power than Bali. His words, 
however, reveal that his thinking is still on the worldly plane. His treatise, 
called the Shukra Neeti, is also predominantly materialistic. The Sanskrit 
literature contains many texts upon economical ethics, which include the 
Shukra Neeti, Kamadak Neeti, and others. In the Shukra Neeti, 
Shukracharya has stated that we should not give away all our wealth. We 



166 



should use a portion of it for Dharma, a portion for fame, a portion for our 
own use, a portion for our dependents and a portion for investments. Our 
income should be systematically divided. 

Bali, however, was committed to the Truth, and did not accept 
Shukracharya's advice. He urged Vamana Bhagwan again, to ask for 
whatever He wanted. Thus persuaded, the Lord asked for only three 
footsteps of earth, measured by His feet. Bali pleaded with Him to ask for 
something more, but Vamana Bhagwan replied that this was all He wanted. 
Bali accepted His wish, and sent for water for the sankalpa*. 
Preachers narrate humorous incident, which is not mentioned in the 
Bhagwat, but is given in other Puranas. The story says that when Bali asked 
for water, for the sankalpa, Shukracharya took on a tiny form and sat inside 
the spout of the jhaari* to prevent the water from flowing into Bali's hand. 
Vamana Bhagwan said, "Let me see what is blocking the flow of the water." 
He picked up a sharp blade of grass, and poked it into the spout of the jhaari. 
This pierced one eye of Shukracharya, and he remained one eyed after that. 
The message of this is that the vision of any person who tries to block a 
good deed, generosity, or Dharma, does not remain equal, but gets tainted. 
The water began to flow. Bali's wife supported Bali's pledge, when he said 
formally, "I give earth, covered by Vamana' s three feet." 
Vamana Bhagwan became Trivikram* as soon as Bali completed his 
sankalpa. With the first foot, He covered Bali's earthly land. With the 
second foot, He covered Bali's Heavenly land, which he would get after 
death, as a result of good deeds on earth. Then the Lord asked Bali angrily, 
where He should place the third foot He had been promised. 
Bali had a vision of the Lord's Virata* form. Jambavaan had the opportunity 
to do three parikramas* of the Virata Lord, and cry out the Jayghosh*. 
When the Daityas saw that their King had been tricked, they prepared to 
battle with Vamana. Seeing this, the Lord's attendants also armed 
themselves and began to kill the Daityas. Bali persuaded the Daityas to stop 
fighting. 

Bali told the Lord, "Maharaj, please do not be displeased. It is true that you 
have taken both my worlds, by two footsteps, but I do have one place left, to 
surrender at Your feet. Please accept it as the third footstep. 

Padam triteeyam kuru sheershni me' nijam. 



167 



Please place Your foot on my head. All my possessions have been given to 
You, but the one who gave is not yet given. Please also accept the giver, 
because the arrogance of being the giver brings much suffering." 
Vamana Bhagwan placed His foot on Bali's head, and took measure of his 
ego. When He took the loka* and the parloka*, He had taken the Artha, 
Dharma, and Kama away. Now, He took away Bali's ego. This left no scope 
for any doubt about Bali's liberation - mukti. That is why, even today, 
whenever someone does a great daan*, it is called Balidaan*. The next 
episode will come tomorrow. 



Om Shantih! Shantih! Shantih! 



168 



BHGAWATAMRIT 
Pravarchan VIII 
(Skandha VIII & IX & X) 



Jay-Vijay are both liberated souls, who live in the land of the Lord. Jay- 
Vijay descend thrice, to the world, for the purpose of establishing the fact 
that the Lord controls those in bondage as well as those who are liberated. 
He controls every being. To show that the liberated souls are under the 
Lord's control, Jay and Vijay descend from Vaikunth. They do not, 
however, cease to remember the Lord. Hiranyakashipu's son, Prahlad, was a 
devotee by nature. The Lord came as Narasimha, to liberate Hiranyakashipu. 
The four brothers, the Sanatkumars combined into one, and manifested as 
Prahlad. Their combined powers of knowledge, detachment, devotion, 
Dharma, vivek*, and justice, supported Prahlad up to the time 
Hiranyakashipu was liberated. 

Prahlad' s son was Virochan, and his son was Bali. It was mentioned 
yesterday, that Prahlad' s sense of justice made him give a judgment which 
went against his own son. It was also mentioned that Virochan gave up his 
life, at the request of a Brahmin, knowing full well that the Brahmin was his 
enemy in disguise. Bali had the complete gnan of the Bhagwat dharma". 
This is declared in the verse which gives the names of those who know the 
Bhagwat Dharma fully: 

<*M«JhU«: W^: f*TR: ^farft *FJ: I 
M^IKl ^H^f *W ^fa^wfoetoH I I ^.3.3° 
Svayambhurnaaradah shanbhuh kumarah kapilo manuh, 
Prahlaado janako bheeshmo balirvaiyaasakirvayam. 
6.3.20. 

As narrated yesterday, Bali gave his all to the Lord, acting against the advice 
of his Guru. The significance of giving the loka-paraloka is that the merit of 
good deeds is given up. The fruit of good deeds is happiness - both here, and 
in Heaven. Dharma' s fruits are visible and invisible as well. It gives 
happiness while we live, and happiness after we die. Bali offered up the 
cause of happiness (which is the good deeds he had done) as well as the 
Dharma which had prompted the good deeds, to the Lord. The Lord 



169 



responded by accepting Bali, and giving him a place at His feet. The Lord 
had asked him for only three foot-lengths of earth, but all Bali had, had been 
taken up by two foot-lengths of the Lord. When the question was raised 
about where the third foot should be placed, Bali - a knower of the Bhagwat 
Dharma - knew what should be offered, and offered himself. 
The question is, how does one offer one's self? The principle of philosophy 
is that the doer is not a subject of the work done. Just as nobody can climb 
onto his own shoulder, the doer cannot be enjoyed by the work done by him. 
This is called the Karma-Karta-Virodha. If someone says, "I offer this to 
you," it is like a Gandharva* Vivaha*, where they exchange vows in secret, 
but part ways as soon as they quarrel. A total surrender of the ego is only 
possible when the Lord accepts the offering of our self. A person who gives 
himself to another, may withdraw. However, nobody can withdraw once the 
Lord has accepted him. This is the principle of the Bhakti Shastra*. 
So, the Lord placed His foot on Bali's head, and accepted him. The Lord 
said, "Bali, all you were, are, and will be, is Mine. This includes your 
Dharma, karma*, sukha*, dukha*, body, and ahankara*." This is being 
accepted by the Lord! 

Giving is complete only when it is accepted by the receiver. A person may 
continue to give, but if the receiver refuses to accept, how can the gift be 
fulfilled? Bali's offering was fulfilled. 

To establish Bali's sincerity, the Lord told Garuda to tie Bali up. Garuda 
obeyed. Bali was trussed up thoroughly. 

Imagine the scene. When Bali was tied up, Prahlad came, to see the 
excellence and depth of his Grandson's devotion. He did a stuti of the Lord. 
"Lord, it was You, who gave Bali the aishwarya*, and it was You who took 
it away. Your giving and you taking are filled with benevolence." 
Bali's wife, Vindhyavali, said, "Maharaj, You have always been, and always 
will be, the Lord of the world. Those who are foolish consider worldly goods 
to be theirs - W^T n m ^ft)w i?\ ^f: 'svaamyam tu tatra kudhiyoapara 
eesha kuryuh '. It is a Grace that You took back what belonged to You." 
Brahmaji also came at that time, and said, "Lord, even he who offers You 
just a blade of grass and a handful of water, gets the best of good fortune. 
Bali gave You the daan of Triloki*, and You have deigned to accept even his 
ego. Now, the Bhakti Sampradaya will vanish, if even Bali is kept in 
bondage." 

The Lord replied, "Brahmaji, whenever I Grace someone, I take away all 
they have. I leave them with nothing. I do this to make sure that they are no 
longer intoxicated with wealth, and will never disdain Me, or any other." 



170 



Brahman yamanugrihnaami tadvisho vidhunomyaham, 
Yanmadah purushah stabdho lokam maam chaavamanyate \ 
8.22.24. 

Then the Lord said, "I have done a formal sankalpa, holding kusha*, 
akshata* and water, in the palm of My hand. So, when I took everything 
which belonged to Bali, everything of Mine became his, as well. Now he 
will go to Sutal Loka*, where he will have all the luxuries as well as satsang. 
Prahladji will come too, and I will live there, as their watchman." 
Just see what the Lord did, after taking away everything from Bali. He 
stood, as a servant, with the Gada in His hand. It is said that Bali's palace in 
Sutal Loka, had twelve entrances. Ravana once went, to fight Bali. Nobody 
obstructed his path. When he reached Bali's door, he found a dwarf guarding 
the entrance, with a gada in his hand. He saw the same Vamana guard every 
entrance he went to. Amazed, he asked, "Who are you, to stop me from 
entering?" Vamana replied that this was not the right time for him to enter. 
Ravana threatened to physically lift, and throw Vamana aside. Hearing this, 
the Lord pushed Ravana with the toes of His left foot. Ravana was thrown 
from Sutal Loka to Lanka. He never again attempted to face Bali. 
This story shows that no matter how many vicissitudes come into the life of 
a person who does bhajan of the Lord, he ultimately gets everything. By the 
Lord's Grace, Bali got glory, luxury, protection, satsang, and also the 
position which had been taken away. Over and above all this, he got the 
Lord! This same Bali will be Indra, in the next Manvantara. As soon as this 
Manvantara ends, Bali will become Indra. 

After concluding the story of Bali, in the eighth Skandha, Shri Shukadevji 
Maharaj answers Parikshit's questions about the Vedas. This comes in the 
last - the twenty fourth - chapter. He says that the Vedas abide even at the 
time of Pralay. The Lord takes on the form of a Matsya*. All the medicinal 
plants, and seeds of animals, are placed on a giant boat. The Lord protects 
the contents of the boat, the Saptarshis*, and Rajarshi* Satyavrata. The Lord 
first comes in to the cupped palms of Satyavrata, as a tiny fish, seeking his 
protection. The Lord shows that nobody protects anybody - only the Lord 
protects all creatures. It is a false vanity when people think that they are 
protecting others. Matsya Bhagwan* showed Rajarshi Satyavrata that he had 
protected the fish only in a kamandalu and then in a lake. "But I am 
protecting you during the Pralay", he said, tying Satyavrata' s boat to His 



171 



snout. He not only saved the King, He also gave him the knowledge of the 
Vedas. This is called the Matsya Purana. 

King Satyavrata praised the Lord, saying, "The Atmagnan of the people has 
been smothered by Avidya. Their intellect is inclined towards sense objects. 
Please tell us how to deal with this." 

The Lord replied, "The only solution is to obtain the knowledge of the 
Vedas. Unless one has this knowledge, it is not possible to understand the 
subtleties of Dharma, Bhakti, Loka, Para Loka. This knowledge is not 
created by Ishwara, or by a jeeva. It does not emerge from the inanimate, or 
the shunya*. It is a complete knowledge which can be known only through 
personal enlightenment." 

The eighth Skandha ends here, and the ninth begins. I will tell you just the 
essence of the ninth Skandha, because I am eager to reach the Krishna Leela, 
with all possible speed. So I propose to describe all the lineages with 
extreme brevity. Even Raja Parikshit - after hearing the ninth Skandha - 
tells Shri Shukadevji Maharaj, "You have described all the lineages. Now 
please tell me about the glory of Shri Krishna." 

Kathito vanshavistaaro bhavataa somasooryayoh, 

Raagnaa chobhayavanshaanaam charitam paramaadbhutam. 

10.1.1. 

Now see what the ninth Skandha is. The eighth Skandha was called the 
'Sadharma Skandha'*, and the ninth Skandha is called the 'Ishanukatha 
Skandha". There is a difference between Sadharma and Ishanukatha 
Skandhas. Sadharma gives the stories of religious rites, and its purpose is to 
purify the character of those who read or hear it. The Ishanukatha, however, 
is the story of devotees. So, the Ishanukatha contains the descriptions of the 
Manvantaras, the Kings therein, the children of the Kings, their followers, 
and their people. 

Bhakti is a quality of the heart. It does not talk about whether sandalwood 
paste should be applied vertically on the forehead, or horizontally. Nor is 
there any reference to whether a rosary of Tulsi beads is superior to 
Rudhrakasha beads, and whether the clothes we wear should be red or 
yellow. 

The jeeva is a part of the Lord. It may be in the form of a tree, a creeper, an 
animal or a bird. A portion of something is always connected to the whole. 



172 



Bhakti cannot be separated from the object of its devotion. You will see that 
everybody in the Shrimad Bhagwat is a devotee. 

The Vaivasvat Manvantara has twenty four types of activities. These result 
in different characteristics in people. The Satpurush* endeavor to lead 
everybody towards the Lord. This is why the ninth Skandha contains twenty 
four chapters, and indicates how people fitted with twenty four kinds of 
drives are lead towards the Lord. Of the thousands of people described here, 
none remain bound by Maya. All are liberated. Each one if filled with 
detachment. 

Two things are necessary, for a person to be free of desires. Detachment and 
Devotion. Bhakti - devotion - transforms desire, and detachment weakens it. 
Both are described in this Skandha. 

Vivasvat Manu had ten sons, who all became great Kings. The story of the 
Surya Vansha* is presented in twelve chapters, because the Sun is 
dvadashatma*. So is the Lord Vishnu. Hence, though the Lord Shri Krishna 
is born in the Chandra Vansh*, He is described as a dvadashatma. The 
twenty four chapters are divided into two, with twelve each describing the 
Surya and the Chandra lineages. 

Of Manu's sons, some spread the Gnan Marg*, some spread the Vairagya 
Marg, some, the Bhakti Marg, and some spread the principle of keeping a 
promise. Each son of Manu had a special quality. If you read anybody's 
biography, make sure to find out what their specialty is. In his article called 
'Tattva Deep', Shri Vallabhacharyaji Maharaj has described all the 
specialties, and other great Teachers have written commentaries upon it. 
At first, Vivasvan Manu had no children. He asked Vasishthaji to undertake 
a Yagya for him. The sankalpa was for a son, but a daughter was born. They 
began to investigate the reason. It was found that the Queen had asked 
Brahmaji for a daughter, instead of a son. Ultimately Vasishthaji prayed to 
the Lord, and by His Grace, the sex of the child was transformed from 
female to male. However, after some time, he was turned into a maiden, 
because of Shankarji's wrath. Later on, it was decided that he would 
alternately become a man for some time, and a woman for some time. 
There is nothing unbelievable in this. Everything is possible in this 
indefinable creation. We are unable to believe in the unlimited possibilities 
because our knowledge is limited. It is extremely difficult to gauge the 
number of elements and secrets in Nature. Nor can we imagine how the 
powerful and great, divine people can manipulate Nature. The true devotees 
of the Lord have access to His power, and can make possible what seems 
impossible to us. 



173 



The story of Raja Sharyati and Chyavan Rishi comes next. Raja Sharyati had 
a beautiful daughter called Sukanya. One day, the King went into the forest 
with Sukanya and some soldiers, and they reached Chyavan Rishi 's Ashram. 
Sukanya saw an anthill, with two rays of bright light shining in it. Intrigued, 
she picked up a thorn and pricked the points of light. Blood began to ooze 
out, instead. The stool and urine of the soldiers were blocked. The King was 
perplexed. He came to the conclusion that one of his soldiers had done 
something very wrong. Sukanya felt very frightened, but she admitted her 
folly. The King was terrified, but Chyavan Rishi emerged, and told the King 
not to worry. Then he offered to marry Sukanya. The King got them 
married. 

Some time later, the Ashvini Kumars came to the Ashrama of Chyavan 
Rishi. They restored his youth, at his request. Chyavan Rishi was so pleased 
that he began to plan that they receive a portion of the Yagya. Their share 
had been discontinued because they were Ayurvedic practitioners. Doctors 
have to uproot medicinal plants, even if it is for the purpose of healing the 
sick. They mix the plants with impure items, like meat. That is why the 
Devtas had refused to give them a portion of the Yagya. However, thanks to 
Chyavan Rishi, they began to get a portion once again. 
Maharshi Chyavan had tremendous powers. He made his father-in-law, King 
Sharyati, undertake a Som Yagya, with the intention of procuring the 
Ashvini Kumar's portion for them. Unable to tolerate this, Indra lifted his 
Vajra to kill King Sharyati, but Chyavan Rishi used his powers to 
immobilize Indra' s hand. He relented only after all the Devtas had pleaded 
with him, and Indra had agreed to allow the Ashvini Kumars to take a 
portion of the 
Yagya. 

Nabhag was also born in Manu's lineage. He spent many years studying at 
his Guru's Ashrama. When he returned, he found that his brothers had 
usurped his share of the wealth, leaving nothing for him. When he asked his 
brothers for his share, they replied, "This old Father is your share. There is 
no other share for you." 

Nabhag went to his Father, and told him everything. The Father said, "My 
son, these people are cheating you, but don't worry. Brahmins are doing a 
Yagya at a certain place. They will make a mistake while chanting the hymn. 
When you correct their mistake, they will let you have the materials of the 
Yagya." 

Nabhag did as his father said. When he began to gather up the materials at 
the end of the Yagya, Rudra came and stopped him. "How can you take 
what is mine?" he asked. Nabhag replied that the Yagyik priests had given it 



174 



to him. Rudra said, "All right. I will accept the judgement of your Father 
regarding this." 

After listening to the whole story, Nabhag's Father said, "Yes, my son, it is 
true that this belongs to Rudra. It is not yours." 

Rudra was pleased that Nabhag's Father had given an impartial judgement. 
He gave everything to Nabhag, and Nabhag became a wealthy man. 
Nabhag's son was Ambarish. His devotion for the Lord was so intense that 
his heart burnt like a furnace, with his longing. He burnt with desire for the 
Lord. So he was given the name Ambarish. He spent his whole life in 
serving the Lord. He would walk to the temple, and sweep the floor himself. 
He experienced joy in serving the Lord. 

Once, Ambarish did a sankalpa to observe the Ekadashi Vrat for one year. 
On the last day, just as he was about to culminate it with a particular 
procedure, Durvasaji came in uninvited. Ambarish welcomed him and 
respectfully asked him to have a meal. Durvasaji replied that he would first 
go to the Yamuna, with all his disciples, bathe, do the ritual of the Sandhya 
Vandan, and then return for a meal. 

Durvasaji delayed. The auspicious period for the paran was coming to an 
end. Ambarish was trapped in a Dharma dilemma. He asked the Brahmins 
what he should do. "Take a sip of the holy water within the auspicious 
period," they advised. "This is breaking the fast without eating anything 
before your guest has eaten - 3#iw Hifeid ^r^'ashitam naashitam cha tat'. " 
Look, what we call 'naashtaa' in Hindi, is Hifeid 'naashitam ', because it is 
just a snack. It is not a full meal, but it help ease the pangs of hunger. That is 
why it is called Hifeid 'naashitam '. 

Ambarish did as the Brahmins advised - chose the middle path, between 
HiRfiri 'naashitam' and 3#lcT 'ashitam' - he took charanamrit. Durvasa 
returned just then, and was furious to see that Ambarish had taken some 
water. He created a demoness called Krityaa, to kill Ambarish. The Lord's 
discus, called Sudarshan, was protecting Ambarish. It rose up when Krityaa 
rushed at him, and she fled in fear. Not satisfied with this, the Sudarshan 
Chakra turned towards Durvasaji. Durvasaji started to run, trying to escape 
from the Chakra. He went to the abode of Brahma, but who there, has the 
power to protect him from the Lord's Sudarshan Chakra? Brahmaji 
confessed his inability to save Durvasaji. Durvasaji received an identical 
reply at Kailash, the abode of the Lord Shiva. He rushed to Vaikunth, and 
prayed to the Lord Vishnu, to call His Chakra off. However, see the reply he 
got from the Lord - 



175 



Aham bhaktaparaadheeno hyasvatantra iva dvija, 
Saadhubhirgrastahridayo bhaktairbhaktajanapriyah. 
Naahamaatmaanamaabhaase " madbhaktaih saadhubhirvinaa, 
Shriyam chaatyantikeem Brahman ye^shaam gatiraham paraa. 9.4.63-64. 

"Durvasaji, I am controlled by My devotees. I belong to them and they 
belong to Me. My devotees win Me over, the way a loving wife wins over 
her husband. Under the circumstances, I can do nothing to help you, but I 
can tell you how to save yourself. You must surrender to the person you 
have wronged, and which caused My Chakra to rise up and chase you. He is 
the only person who can save you now." 

Durvasaji surrendered at the feet of Ambarish, begging him to call off the 
fearsome Chakra. Ambarish was distressed, and begged Durvasaji to get up. 
Then he folded his hands, and prayed to the Sudarshan Chakra to forgive 
Durvasaji. The Sudarshan Chakra quietened, Ambarish bowed down to 
Durvasaji, served him a good meal, and then had his own. 
The message given by the Lord to Durvasaji, through these two verses, is the 
foundation for four branches of the Bhakti samparaday*, and all of them 
accept the Lord as their Acharya. 

People often accuse Durvasaji of being bad tempered and unfair, but that is a 
mistake. Durvasaji is an enlightened devotee, and a part of Shankarji. He 
sacrifices his own reputation in order to show the greatness of the Lord's 
devotees, and how they are protected by the Lord. People would never have 
known Ambarish 's patience and forbearance, had Durvasa not shown anger. 
Nor would they have known how the Lord's protection was always with His 
devotee. Durvasaji thus became the catalyst for revealing the greatness of 
the Lord and His devotees. We tend to see only the outward behavior of 
Durvasaji. If we look a bit deeper, we will see that his heart is filled with 
love. 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj narrated the stories of the Ikshavaku Vansha, 
Mandhata, Saubhari Rishi, Trishanku, Harishchandra, and finally, the 
character of the sages. He explained that the sons of King Sagar (in Manu's 
lineage) set out to look for the Yagya horse, which had been stolen. The 
Yagya could not be completed successfully without it. The princes dug up a 
great pit, as they looked for the horse, and reached the Ashram of Kapil 
Bhagwan. They saw the horse tied there, and jumped to the conclusion that 



176 



Kapil Bhagwan had stolen it. They abused him and called him a thief. Kapil 
Bhagwan raised his eyes to look at them, and they were instantly burnt to 
cinders. 

It is a great injustice to accuse someone without verifying the facts. The sons 
of Sagar made this mistake, and the result was that they were destroyed. 
Shri Shukadevji Maharaj said, "Parikshit, Sagar had a son called Asamanjas, 
by his wife, Keshini. Asamanjas had a son called Anshuman. Anshuman 
went to Kapildevji, and pleaded with him to forgive his uncles for their 
misbehavior. Kapilji was pleased with him, and told him he could take back 
his Grandfather's Yagyik horse. He also said, "Anshuman, my child, your 
uncles have turned into ashes. Their souls can be liberated only by the 
waters of the river Ganga. There is no other method for their salvation." 
With the return of the horse, Sagar completed the Yagya. Ha gave the 
Kingdom to Anshuman, and freed himself of all worldly ties. Anshuman 
tried his best to bring Gangaji to earth, but did not succeed. It was his 
Grandson, Bhagirath, who ultimately achieved this. The benefits of Ganga's 
coming to earth are too obvious to require elaboration. 
Gangaji is filled with Divine powers. She freed the accursed souls of Sagar' s 
sons, and made them pure. The meaning of the word 'Ganga', is - n^fcl 
'gacchati ' or ^ ¥R 'i^fd <*4m11ci 'gam gaganam gacchati vyaapnoti '. Both 
are grammatically correct, with two roots being used. The Ganga is the flow 
of the knowledge which fills the universe. She originates at the feet of the 
Lord Vishnu. A bath in her waters purifies our life. So does a sip of her 
waters, or even the mere sight of this holy river. The Ganga has three forms 
- the Adhidaivik, the Adhyatmik, and the Adhibhautik. The Adhibhautik 
form is visible to all, but only the great Mahapurush know her Adhidaivik 
and Adhyatmik forms. 

Sudas came later on, in Bhagirath 's lineage. After him, the lineage was 
changed. Vasishthaji made the change because the Lord was to be born as 
Shri Ramachandra, in the lineage. Raghu, Aja, and then Dasharath, were 
born successively, in the same lineage. Dasharath had four sons - 
Ramachandra, Laxman, Bharat and Shattrughna. 

The Shrimad Bhagwat gives the story of Shri Ramachandra in just three 
chapters. Some people, who undertake the seven day ritual discourse of the 
Bhagwat, take a long time to narrate it. Some get carried away, and take as 
much as three days for this. They are not concerned with other episodes. The 
character of the Lord is so famous, that Valmiki and other Munis have 
described it at length. It is also mentioned in the Mahabharata. Most people 
are familiar with Goswami Tulsidas' description of Ramcharit. That is why I 
narrate it in brief, as given in the Bhagwat. 



177 



As per the Shrimad Bhagwat, Shri Rama is not born only to Kaushalya. 
Kaushalya is the personification of a pure intellect. Dasharath is the 
personification of a pure mind. The combination brings forth the 
manifestation of the essence of the Lord, in the hearts of both Kaushalya and 
Dasharath. To establish and clarify this point, the author of the Bhagwat 
presents it, to reveal the Adhibhautik, Adhidaivik and Adhyatmik form of 
Shri Ramachandra. 

Shri Shankaracharya Bhagwan describes the Adhyatmik glory of Shri 
Ramachandra as follows: 

Teertvaa mohaarnavam hatvaa kaamakrodhaadiraakshasam, 
Shaantiseetasamaayuktah aatmaaraamo viraajate \ 

Shri Ramanujacharya heard the Valmiki Ramayana eighteen times from his 
Guru, and he experienced eighteen interpretations of the story. One of these 
is Adhyatmik. So, the Adhyatmik interpretation of the life of Shri 
Ramachandra has been prevalent since ancient times. 

The Shrimad Bhagwat does not mention the Tadaka-vadh, but it does 
mention the killing of Subahu. It says that the Lord threw Marich a great 
distance away, but killed Subahu. Shri Ramachandra' s childhood is given in 
short, but has much to teach. It teaches us how we should love our brothers, 
obtain satsang of Rishis, and allow younger brothers to win, while playing 
together. 

According to the Shrimad Bhagwat, the Lord Shri Ramachandra' s character 
establishes the righteous paths of keeping a pledge, going to the forest, 
accepting adversity, reducing the Earth's burden, loving the wife, and 
looking after the people. Shri Ramachandra sacrificed His personal 
happiness for the sake of His people. In the Uttar Ramcharit, it is said: 

Sne ^ham dayaam cha maitreem cha athavaa jaanakeemapi, 
Aaraadhanaaya lokasya munchato naasti me " vyathaa. 

"For the sake of My people, I can sacrifice those I love, My innate 
compassion, My own happiness, and even My beloved Janaki. I will feel no 
regret in doing any of these, if it is required to make My people happy." 



178 



That is why the Shrimad Bhagwat says - ^i^ddHN sqftifsTcTTrR^ 
' upaasitalokaaya upashikshataatmane' ,; '. The meaning of this is that the 
Lord, Shri Ramachandra, schooled His own heart. He did not lecture other 
people. It also indicates that Shri Ramachandra did not worship Ishwara, the 
Brahman, or Himself. He worshipped only the people. For this, He went to 
the forests and undertook several kinds of hardships. 

Janakiji once said to Shri Rama, "We have now come to the Dandakaranya. 
Many demons wander here. If they see Your bow, arrows and other 
weapons, they will know that You are a Kshatriya, and will attack us." 
The Lord replied, "Janaki, I can give up My life. I can leave You and 
Laxman, too, if need be. I can never, however, give up My pledge. My 
pledge is sacrosanct. To keep My pledge is My first Dharma." That is why it 
is said, TFTt Mroi, TFTt faw^R srf: 'Raamo dvirnabhibhashate \ Raamo 
vigrahavaan dharmah. ' 

The Lord Shri Ramachandra not only met the Rishis, He also went to 
Shabari's Ashram. Shabari's state was such, that every night she dreamt that 
Shri Ramachandra would come the next day. A Bhojpuri poet has written, 
^ "^FRcfr 3tm w TFTT 3^" ^tt ! ' ' sabari de ^khe " le " sapanavaa aaj ghara 
raamaa aaihain naa. ' Shabari would gather fruits and flowers every day. 
She would sweep the pathway to the Ashram, apply fresh paste on the floor 
of her hut, and tell people, "He will surely come today." She would place a 
mat in anticipation of His coming, and sitting on it. 

The Lord Shri Rama knew of the love in Shabari's heart, so He went to her 
Ashram. Shabari's joy knew no bounds. She said, "Lord, I am just a poor 
woman, unfit in every way. How am I to serve You?" 

The Lord said, "Shabari, listen carefully. I am telling you something 
important." 

Shabari said, "All right, Lord, please tell me." 

The Lord said, "Look, Shabari, one kind of Bhakti is to have satsang. 
Another kind is to love to listen to discourses upon Me." 

Prathama bhagati santanakara sangaa, 
Doosari rati mama katha prasangaa. 

The Lord enumerated nine kinds of Bhakti, and said, "If a person obtains 
even one kind, he becomes dear to Me. You, Shabari, have all nine kinds of 
Bhakti," 



179 



Sakala prakaara bhagati dridha tore \ 

The kind of praise bestowed by the Lord on Shabari, is not found elsewhere. 
The Lord didn't really wish to preach to Shabari; He just wanted to praise 
her. 

Then the Lord Shri Ramachandra befriended Sugriva, and built a bridge 
across the sea. To build bridges is His job. Because of Him, Vasishtha and 
Vishwamitra became friends, Dasharath and Janaka became relatives, and 
Kevat met Vasishtha. Wherever there were differences, some chasm of some 
kind, the Lord bridged the difference. 

After befriending Sugriva, the Lord Shri Ramachandra attacked Lanka. He 
defeated Ravana and the Rakshasas, and brought Sitaji back. They were 
crowned, when they returned to Ayodhya. The Lord organized the best 
possible facilities for His people. The Rama Rajya* is held up as an example 
of the ideal, even today. 

The Lord Shri Ramachandra was so generous, that He kept only His clothes 
and sacred thread. His Kingdom and wealth were all gifted to the Brahmins. 
The Brahmins said, "Please look after the Kingdom. We are too busy with 
our rituals of worship. It is only proper that the administration of the 
Kingdom is in Your hands." The Lord accepted their plea, and ruled on their 
behalf. 

The Lord Shri Ramachandra would move about the city at night, to find out 
the true state of the Kingdom. He did not consider it adequate to depend only 
upon His spies. On one occasion, He heard a washer man criticize Sitaji. 
This was enough to make Him tell Laxman to take Sitaji to the Ashram of 
Maharshi Valmiki. 

This decision appears to be extremely harsh, but the Lord Shri Rama had His 
own reasoning. Had He not sent Sitaji away like this, nobody would have 
known the quality of her love for Him. She had been kidnapped by Ravana, 
and taken to Lanka by force. Sitaji was helpless. This was the cause of a 
war, and Sitaji was brought home again. She was totally blameless. Despite 
this, she was sent off to Valmiki Ashram at the words of a mere washer- 
man. How wonderful Sitaji is, that no shadow of resentment rose in her 
heart! 

Once, some people asked Mahatma Gandhi about the injustice done to 
Draupadi by the Pandavas, to Damyanti by Nala, and to Sitaji by Shri Rama. 
Mahatma Gandhi responded by saying, "It should be asked to Draupadi, 



180 



Damyanti and Sitaji, whether they considered themselves victims of 
injustice." 

Sitaji' s love for the Lord Shri Rama was so strong that not even the harshest 
behavior could affect it in any way. Seeing her greatness, Valmiki was 
compelled to say, -hWini: ^iftcT ^iFcr ' seetaayaah charitam mahat ' - meaning 
Sitaji's character is a great one. 

The Shrimad Bhagwat gives the names of three generations of Shri Rama. 
The story of King Videha follows. Raja Nimi told his Guru, Vasishtha that 
Videha had stopped identifying with his body, when he obtained 
enlightenment. The descendents were thereafter refereed to as the Nimi 
Vansha, or the Chandra Vansha. Chandrama manifested from the eye of 
Atri, and this was the start of the Chandra Vansha. 

The stories of the Chandra Vansha include the characters of Vishwamitra, 
Parasurama, and Sahasrarjuna. Sahasrarjuna was so powerful that he 
defeated even a warrior like Ravana. Nobody should think that people born 
in the Chandra Vansha lack valor. 

The Chandra Vansha is predominated by the mind, whereas the Surya 
Vansha is predominated by the intellect. The Saur tattva* predominates in 
the intellect, while the Chaandra tattva* predominates in the mind. The mind 
flourishes on emotion, whereas the intellect flourishes on knowledge. The 
intellect progresses with brightness and knowledge. The mind progresses 
with a glow of happiness and feeling. These are the differences in the 
characteristics of these two lineages. 

The Lord manifests in both, the Saur* and Chandra* Vanshas. This signifies 
that one can obtain the Lord by the methods of love and thought. 
The story of Pururva of the Chandra Vansha comes next. It is given in 
Vaatsyayana's treatise upon the Kama Shastra*, also. Pururva went to 
Heaven. All the Devtas stood up to greet him. Devraj introduced him to the 
Devtas one by one. Pururva would fold his hands and bow respectfully to 
each, as he was introduced. Artha Devta* and Kama Devta* were present, 
but Pururva did not show them respect, because he did not give importance 
to material wealth, or sensual pleasures. This angered the two Devtas, and 
they cursed him, saying, "You will become an Emperor, but you will obtain 
no pleasure from wealth, or your sense organs." 

You see, just as Dharma and Moksha are desirable objectives, so are Artha 
and Kama important for our happiness. To live, we need wealth as well as 
pleasure. Both are demi-gods, worthy of respect. 

Pururva met Urvashi in Indraloka. This story is also given in the Vedas. 
Urvashi was lovely, but sharp tongued. She was rough spoken, because she 
knew that she would have to leave Pururva after he had developed 



181 



detachment. She was loving, because it was through him that the noble 
lineage was to continue. 

Then Shri Shukadevji Maharaj told King Parikshit about Jamadagni, 
Parasurama, and Vishwamitra. After that he came to the story of Yayati. 
Yayati married Devyani (the daughter of Shukracharya) and Sharmishtha 
(the daughter of Vrishaparva). There was considerable animosity between 
the two wives, but both had sons. Devyani's sons were Yadu and Turvasu. 
Sharmishtha had three sons, Druhya, Anu, and Puru. Yadu was the eldest 
and Puru was the youngest. Several generations later, the Lord Shri Krishna 
was born in Yadu's lineage. 

Yayati 's life contained an excess of indulgence as well as acute detachment. 
His indulgence was so insatiable that he took the youth of his youngest son, 
Puru. Then he acquired detachment, returned Puru's youth, gave him the 
Kingdom, and went into the forest. He obtained the experience of the 
Atman, and attained salvation. 

After Yayati came the descendents of Puru - King Dushyant, his son Bharat, 
and Rantidev. Bharat was so strong and brave that at the age of five, he 
would tie up ferocious tigers and play with them. It was as though the Lord's 
courage and power had manifested in his life. 

Rantidev 's story is quite extraordinary. He did not get food or water for forty 
eight days. On the forty ninth day, he got some items, and began to cook 
them. A learned guest came uninvited to his house, so Rantidev served the 
food to him. He gave what was left, to a Shudra visitor. A butcher came after 
that, and was offered whatever little Rantidev could gather. Rantidev felt 
that everybody has Bhakti for the Lord. He began to pray - 

Na kaamaye aham gatimeeshvaraat paraam 

ashtardhiyuktaamapunarbhavam vaa, 

Aarti prapadye ^akhilade ^habhaajaam antahsthito ye ^na bhavantyudukhaah. 
9.21.12. 

"Lord, I desire nothing from You - neither the Heaven after death, nor ashta 
siddhi*. I do not even desire liberation. Please Grace me by granting one 
thing. Let me be seated in the hearts of all those who suffer in this world." 
Imagine that the Lord asked, "What will you do in everybody's heart, 
Rantidev? I abide there, as it is. What work do you have there?" 
Rantidev replied, "I am aware that You are seated in every heart. However, 
You merely observe all that happens. Please continue to be seated there, and 



182 



watch as You do, but let the people receive the happiness they are destined 
to get, but allow me to take all their sorrows. The people of this world are 
very unhappy. So, let their suffering be removed, and happiness fill their 
lives. This is my wish, my Lord." 

Seeing Rantidev's compassion and magnanimity, Brahma, Vishnu and 
Mahesh all manifested before him. They said, "Rantidev, no Brahmin, 
Shudra or Chandal came to trouble you. It was the three of us, who had 
come in their guise. Our purpose was to show the world what the thoughts 
and feelings of an elevated, pure-hearted person are like." 
Later on, in the same lineage, there was a King called Jyamagh. After 
winning a war, he returned home with the princess, Bhojya (of the 
vanquished Kingdom), seated beside him on the chariot. When his Queen, 
Shaivya saw this, she began to berate Jyamagh. "Who have you seated on 
the chariot, in my rightful place?" she demanded angrily. 
King Jyamagh was afraid of his wife, and said hastily, "I have brought her to 
make her your daughter-in-law." 

"But we have no son!" said the Queen. "Nor have you brought up the son of 
any relative. How can you make her your daughter-in-law?" 
The King replied, "We may not have a son now, but she will marry the son 
you get in future." 

The next episode is of King Shurasena of Mathura, also of the same lineage. 
The clans of the Kauravas and Pandavas come from this lineage. Hundreds 
of thousands of names are given in the descriptions of all these Kings. Time 
does not permit detailed enumeration. I am just touching upon the subject. I 
touch them as lightly as a person touches grass, as he passes a village - ttft 
'i-ce>^^t ^ifa 'graamam gachchan trinam sprishati. ' 
Several generations later, Vasudevji was born in Shurasen's lineage. His 
wife was Devki. They had seven sons, and Shri Krishna was born as the 
eighth. His birth brought everything propitious to the earth. Whoever saw 
and loved the knowledge, affection, beauty and wisdom of Shri Krishna, 
obtained salvation. 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj concluded the ninth Skandha with this episode. At 
the beginning of the tenth Skandha, Parikshit said, "Maharaj, you described 
the lineages of the Kings at great length, but you have the story of the birth 
of Shri Krishna of the Yadu Vansha, in just five verses. I am not satisfied 
with this short narration. Please describe the Shri Krishna charita* at 
length." 



183 



Nivrittatarshairupageeyamaanaad 
bhavaushadhaachshrotramanoabhiraamaat, 

Ka uttamashlokagunaanuvaadaat pumaan virajye ^ta vinaapashughnaat. 
10.1.4. 

"Maharaj, the character of the Lord is a medicine. It saves us from the cycles 
of birth and death. It is not made by a greedy doctor. Greedy doctors prolong 
the illness of their patients, to earn more money. This medicine is such, that 
even the greatest devotees of the Lord - who have no desire for anything - 
experience proximity with the Lord. They take joy in feeling close to Him, 
and keep singing His glories. This medicine in not at all bitter; it is sweet. 
Sweet for the ears, and sweet for the mind. Amongst those who sing the 
Lord's glories, are the liberated people. Secondly, His glories help those 
who wish to escape from worldly bondage. Thirdly, it brings happiness to 
the ears and minds of those who listen. So, whoever stays away from 
listening to the discourses upon the character of the Lord, is an apashughna." 
The meaning of apashughna is - STC^H 3hichhh^ itf^T ' apashukam 
aatmaanam hanti ' - it is a person who kills himself. He deprives himself of 
joy and comfort. 

Parikshit said, "My Grandfather, Yudhishthira, and other elders, were 
battling against the armies of the Kauravas. That army was like a vast ocean, 
impossible to cross. It contained mighty warriors like Bhishma, Drona and 
Kama. My forefathers took the support of the lotus feet of the Lord Shri 
Krishna. With His help, they succeeded, just as one successfully crosses the 
ocean with the help of an ocean liner. 

^Tfa ^#FRT 3H| T M?bl ^T^T ^ ^: WTT: I I %o.%&. 

Draunyastraviplushtamidam madangam santaanabeejam 

kurupaandavaanaam, 

Jugopa kukshingata aattachakro maatushcha me " yah sharanam gataayaah. 
10.1.6. 

Sir, when I was in my Mother's womb, I was being burnt by the 
Brahmastra* thrown by Ashwatthama. At that time, I had no emotion. Nor 
was I able to speak. I did not know the Lord, and had no ability to pray. Still, 
the Lord came running to save me, because my Mother surrendered to Him. 
He could have blocked Ashwatthama' s Brahmastra with either His Gada, or 
His Chakra, but He was so impatient to save me that he took the Gada in one 
hand and the Chakra in the other. Maharaj, I wish to hear about that same 



184 



Lord. I feel no hunger and no thirst. I aspire only to imbue the nectar of the 

katha of Shri Krishna, from your gracious lips." 

Shri Shukadevji congratulated Parikshit with great joy, and said, 

client T^m; eil^wrMK^idd *rar 1 1 

Vaasude \akathaaprashnah purushaarstreen punati hi, 
Vaktaaram prichchakam shrotrinstatpaadasalilam yathaa. 
10.1.16. 

"King, whenever a question concerning the Lord is asked, the one who asks 
the question, the one who answers it, and the one who listens to the 
conversation - all three are purified. The sins of the frightened tongue of the 
questioner are wiped away. The quiet tongue of the one who answers, is 
activated. Sweetness begins to flow into the hollow ears of the one who 
hears. Our tongues, ears, and hearts have become immensely dirtied by 
worldly talk, worldly pleasures, Kings, depraved men, women, others, 
wealth, and atheists. So, when the Ganga of the Lord's katha enters our 
heart, not only is a person purified; he becomes supremely pure." 
Shukadevji Maharaj began to tell the story of Shri Krishna without further 
preamble. He said: 

3WRTT ^T^T sfWt *l*fh I \°XX^ 

Bhoomirdripta - nripavyaaja - daityaaneeka - shataayutaih, 
Aakraantaa bhooribhaare ^na brhahmaanam sharanam yayau. 
10.1.17. 

The description of Prithvi* going to Brahmaji is given here. Do not start 
asking where the people on earth were, when she went to Brahmaji! There is 
an Adhidevta* who exists in the earth. Just as every house and village has a 
demi-god, the Prithvi also has one. All items contain a chetan shakti, which 
works on its own. 

Laxmi is of two kinds. One is Krishi Laxmi*, and the other is Svarna 
Laxmi*. Krishi Laxmi is the immovable wealth, and Svarna Laxmi is the 
movable wealth. Bhudevi* is the presiding deity of immovable wealth, and 
Laxmiji is the presiding deity of mobile wealth. The Lord Narayana is the 
husband and Master of both. Hence, nobody has the right to call himself 



185 



Shripati* or Bhupati*. The Lord is the only Shripati and Bhupati, and He 
abides in all hearts. 

So, when Bhudevi wanted to go to Vaikunth, she felt embarrassed to go 
alone. She went to Brahma. Brahma is Narayana's son, but not born though 
Laxmidevi or Bhudevi. He manifested on the lotus that emerged from the 
naval of the Lord. Hence, he has equal affection for both wives of Narayana. 
Brahmaji identified with Bhudevi 's sorrow, as though it was his own. He is 
the Devta of Rajoguna. He called Rudra - the Devta of Tamoguna - and 
other satvik* Devtas. They all accompanied Prithvi to the banks of the 
Ksheersagar. They chanted the Purusha Sukta in praise of the Lord. 
Purusha Sukta means the voice of the Lord. It describes the entire creation as 
the immense form of the Lord, and Narayana fills the entire creation. 
Everything in creation is an extension of the Lord. 

Brahmaji went into a Samadhi while chanting the Purusha Sukta. The Lord 
appeared in the sky of his mind, and said, "You have all come to apprise Me 
of Bhuhdevi's sorrow. I am her husband, and I am fully aware of what 
troubles her. What kind of a husband is it, who is unaware of what troubles 
his wife, and a deputation is needed to inform him? I know everything in 
detail - tj^r ^yi<=i*jcTt W^R: 'puraiva punsaavahrito dharaajvarah '. " 
When Brahmaji Samadhi broke, he told the Devtas, "The Lord will come. 
Everybody should go to Vraja and be born in the Yadu Vansha. The Lord 
will be born as Vasudev's son in a few days." 

Now see what actually the burden which troubles the Mother Earth is. The 
daityabhaav*, the arrogance of people, the tendencies of attachment and 
possessiveness, are the burdens. When people are identified by such factors, 
they become an unbearable burden on earth. 

Brahmaji said, "Narayana will be accompanied by Sankarshan. Sankarshan 
will come as the elder brother, named Balram. The reason for this is that 
during the Ramavtar*, Sankarshan came as Laxman, the younger brother of 
Rama. Shri Ramji would, at times, scold him, and Laxman never had his 
way. That is why he has said that he will come as the elder brother this time, 
and get an occasional chance to scold the Lord! The younger brother has to 
listen to the elder brother. Sankarshan wants to serve the Lord, whether it is 
as a younger brother or as an elder brother. Yogmaya* will accompany 
Sankarshan, to serve the Lord. 

All the Devtas were happy to hear this, and dispersed. Vasudevji's marriage 
with Devki took place at Vraja. Devki was given a great deal of wealth, as 
her dowry. 

People used to give a lot of wealth to their daughters, when they got married. 
In those days, the sons were given the achala* wealth, and the daughters 



186 



were given the chala* wealth of the father. People had made this 
arrangement so that daughters would get an equal share from their fathers. 
At the time of departure, Devki's cousin brother, Kansa (the son of Ugrasen, 
who was the King of Mathura) drove the bridal carriage, holding the reins of 
the horses. He did this to please Devki. Hundreds of golden carriages 
followed them. 

Seeing this, the Devtas were worried. "If Kansa becomes so affectionate 
towards Devki and Vasudev, how will the Lord get a chance to kill him, 
when he is born as Devki's son? It should be announced that Kansa' s death 
is destined to be at the hands of Devki's child." A celestial voice was heard, 
"O foolish Kansa! Who are you so fond of? The eighth child of this very 
Devki is destined to kill you!" 

Asyaastvaamastamo garbho hantayaan vahase^abudha. 10.1.34. 

Note that the celestial voice did not say whether the child would be male or 
female. It simply confused Kansa by using the word 'child'. 
It is also worth noting what the affection of a wicked man is like. Kansa left 
the reins as soon as he heard the akashvani. He caught Devki's plait, and 
dragged her off the chariot. He drew his sword to kill her, with no thought of 
the people on the streets of Mathura. His newly wedded sister had the 
auspicious thread tied round her wrist. She was leaving her home, to go to 
her new home. What would people say if she was killed? Just a moment 
earlier, Kansa was displaying so much brotherly affection! In a flash, he 
became her enemy! That is why Sant* Tulsidas has said that the affection of 
a wicked person is never stable - ^\ tftfcT W f«R ^ 'khala kee preeti 
yathaa thir nahin '. The latent tendencies of a wicked person always show up 
as soon as his selfish interest is thwarted. This is the sign of a selfish person. 
However, see the miracle which took place at this point. Devki is held by her 
plait, and the sword is poised to cut her throat. Her husband, Vasudev, is 
standing there. However, she does not plead with Kansa, saying, "My 
brother, you have so much affection for me. Why do you want to kill me?" 
Nor does she ask Vasudev, "Where is your manliness? You have given me 
your love. I am your wife. Why don't you kill the man who wants to kill 
me?" Devki does not say a word. She is the personification of forbearance, 
forgiveness and peace! This is the kind of Mother the Lord chooses for His 
own birth. What is Devki? She is a combination of all positive forces 
-H^oiai 'de\kee sarvade\taa\ She is the form of subtle, intellect - 



187 



c^yqi spPTT ^nqRir*?: 'drishyate^ tagrayaa buddhyaa sooksmayaa 

sookshamadarshibhih. ' At the same level, what is Vasudev? He is pure 
Sattva* - ~%t$ fof^g sRJ^rf^cW sattvam vishuddham vasude \ashabditam '. 
That is why Vasudev praised Kansa with great courage, and said, "Kansaji, 
what are you trying to do? Great warriors all over the world praise your 
valor - witH°hiui: 'shlaaghaneeyagunah shooraih '. If you kill this sister 
of yours, people will criticize you instead. 

Now, there remains the topic of death, which comes to us all, one day. Why 
kill this poor lady for that? This world is like a dream. A person who is 
threatened by death should never hate any creature. Enmity is the cause of 
hatred. Anger is the cause for enmity, and aversion is the cause for anger. 
Arrogance, born out of nescience, allows it to enter our life. So, we should 
never harbor rancor." 

Tasmaanna kasyachid drohamaachare V sa tathaavidhah. 
10.1.44. 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj says, "When Vasudevji failed to convince Kansa 
by reasoning, he decided that the best thing to do, was to delay death, as far 
as possible. 

Mrityurbuddhimataapohyo yaavad buddhibalodayam. 
10.1.48. 

Vasudevji thought, "There are no children at present, and none may be born 
in future, either. It is not proper that I allow my wife to be killed for the sake 
of children who may never be born. It is also possible that Kansa dies before 
we get children; or that a child kills him first. Who knows what will happen 
in future? I should stop thinking about future possibilities, and save Devki." 
With these thoughts, Vasudevji said, "Kansaji, please do not worry. I will 
give you every child born through Devki's womb." 

Vasudevji 's truthfulness was so well known that even a wicked person like 
Kansa had faith that he would never break his word. He let Devki go. 
When Devki's first baby was born, Vasudevji took him to Kansa. Kansa's 
first reaction was, "Take this little one back. What can he do to me? When 
the eighth child is born, bring him to me." 



188 



Naradji was concerned that Kansa was developing godly qualities. How 
could the Lord remove the burden of the earth? He went to Kansa, and 
deliberately misguided him towards ruthlessness. Kansa threw Devki and 
Vasudev into prison, and killed every child as soon as he was born. He also 
ordered the Police to imprison his father, King Ugrasen. 
The Police, however, were firm. "Your word has no value, so long as 
Ugrasen is King," they said. "We cannot imprison him at your orders." 
Kansa got a similar response from the Army. Incensed, he went himself to 
the Court, with handcuffs and chains. He put them on the wrists and ankles 
of his father, in front of the whole court. Nobody dared to say a word. 
Kansa' s wickedness surpassed all limits. 

Svayam nigrahya bubhuje " shoorase ^naan mahaabalah. 
10.1.69. 

The word 'svayam' in this portion of the verse indicates that Kansa, himself, 
put his father, King Ugrasen, in chains, when he did not get any support 
from the Police. He imprisoned his father, and crowned himself as the King. 
Then he gathered all the demonic forces. Jarasandha got his daughters 
married to Kansa. Kansa developed strong friendships with other Asuras, 
like Banasur, Bhaumasur, Aghasur, Bakasur, and started to harass the 
Yaduvanshis. 

The time for Kansa' s happiness was coming to an end. The person, who 
seeks to live by harassing others, is sure to be destroyed. Violence can never 
endure. It is incapable of giving fulfillment to anyone's life. 
If you think of how cruel Kansa was, you will realize that he killed six 
newly born infants of Devki! From the Adhyatmik angle, these six babies 
were the 'shadvikar'. The Atman can be experienced only when the wrong 
tendencies are destroyed. So, after the death of the six wrong tendencies 
represented by Devki 's six babies, Balaramji came as the seventh baby. He 
said, "I will go ahead to see whether this place is suitable for the Lord, or 
not." 

The Lord told Yogmaya, "Balaramji has purified the place for Me. Now, I 
want you to shift him to Rohini's womb, and after that I will come into 
Devki's womb." 

When the Lord entered Devki's womb, she became so radiant that it was as 
though a brilliant gem radiated from within a pot. 

When Kansa saw Devki, he also felt that perhaps this was the child destined 
to kill him. He began to ponder upon how best to tackle the situation. 



189 



See how the Lord came into Devki's womb. Vasudev gave Devki 'manasik 
diksha'*, and established the Lord in her womb. Vasudev gave the initiation 
mentally, and Devki received it mentally. However, where is the Lord not 
present? The Lord is everywhere, and so He is also in the womb. 
This is the reason why Kansa's mind was filled with goodness, when he saw 
Devki. He said, "Oh, this is just a woman; she is my sister, and she is 
pregnant. People will spit on me if I kill her. I will be bitterly criticized. It is 
not proper to kill her just now." 

Kansa began to await the birth of the baby - 3m?T mftsi-w^i-H 'aaste^ 
prateekshanstajjanma'. He began to dream of Krishna all day, while 
sleeping, sitting, getting up, eating or drinking. His own shadow would 
frighten him. He was scared of the sound of his own footstep. He'd see 
Krishna before him, every moment of the day. He may have hated Krishna, 
but his life was filled with thoughts of Krishna. He was immersed in 
Krishna, he was lost in Krishna. 

Now Brahma, Rudra, and the Devtas came to Kansa's prison, and began to 
praise the Lord in Devki's womb. This Garbhastuti* in the Bhagwat is 
outstandingly beautiful. 
w^m wmk ta*r WW ft%?r ^ i 

Satyavratam satyaparam trisatyam satyasya yoni nihitam cha satye\ 
Satyasya satyamritayatyane^tram satyaatmakam tvaam sharanam 
prapannaa. 10.2.26. 

The Devtas said, "Lord, Your vrat is Satya*. Having entered the womb, 
please do not return, because of the discomfort. You have made a pledge. 
Please keep Your promise. Please don't leave half way. You never change 
Your pledge. Truth is Your way. You are the only Truth in all the three 
tenses, and in all the three worlds. You are the beginning of the earth, water, 
fire, wind and sky; and You abide in them. All these are Satya, but You are 
the Satya of Satya. We have come to seek Your protection." 
The Devtas also said, "Lord, You take on the Avatar so that people can 
obtain Your form, worship You, and remember You. 

^ feppT 3R?r *fofR f^lcft ^Klftuii atofFFT I 

Satvam vishuddham shrayate^ bhavaan sthitau shareerinaam 

shre yaupaayanam vapuh. 

10.2.34. 



190 



Lord, You take on a physical form for the sake of devotional worship, so 
that You can be worshipped through the Vedas, Kriyayoga*, tapasya and 
Samadhi. 

Satvam n ache^ddhaataridam nijam bhave^d 

vignaanamagnaanabhidaapamaarjanam. 

10.2.35. 

Lord, if You did not manifest in an Avatar, how could it be proved that You 
exist? People would have gone on contemplating about Your existence. 
None would have seen You with their physical eyes." 
The Devtas bowed at the Lord's feet, and told Devki, "Mother, the Lord has 
entered your womb. Now you need have no fear of Kansa. He is a short- 
lived guest on earth. Your son will protect the Yadu Vansha." 
The Devtas thus eulogized the Lord and Devki. When the time approached 
for the Lord to be born, Brahmaji and Shankarji told the other Devtas that it 
was time to leave. "We will follow you," they said. The Devtas refused to 
leave, saying, "You will get some extra joy by staying back! We won't leave 
without both of you." They surrounded the delivery room, and refused to let 
Brahmaji and Shankarji out. What could the two do? They went ahead, and 
the Devtas followed them to heaven. 

Brahme ^shaanau purodhaaya de \aah pratiyayurdivam. 
10.2.42. 

Shri Shukdevji said, "Parikshit, all the elements were like a fragrant, 
beautifully attired beauty. All the elements were purified. Prakriti beautified 
herself, to welcome the Lord. You can see the beauty of the original shlokas: 

3T2T <Hc5'|u|L|d: cflfiT: WWlr*FT: I 

fa?T: H^I'M rn4dk J |U|ki|HJ 

?Wl WmR|tdM*UIHpHI<=b*l 1 1 
TO: TO?TC#MT ^M^feFT: I 

cleft cfFT: ^Rqtf: WFW: ^fa I 

W^WQ RHldlni ^ft^TcTI I %o3.%-*. 



191 



Atha sarvagunope ^tah kaalah paramashobhanah, 
Yarhye \aajanajanmarksha shaantarkshagrahataarakam. 
Dishah prase ^durgaganam nirmaloduganodayam, 
Mahee mangalabhooyishthapuragraamavrajaakaraa. 
Nadyah pr as annas alilaa hridaa jalaruhshriyah, 
Dvijaalikulasannaadastavakaa vanaraajayah . 
Vavau vaayuh sukhasparshah punyagandhavahah shuchih, 
Agnayashcha dvijaateenaam shaantaastatra samindhata. 
10.3.1-4. 

A poet of Vraja has described what happened next: 

Soi paripooran apaara paarabrahma raashi, 
De\keeke^ kore e^kabaara hee kuraiparo. 

The Lord manifested! Vasudevji saw Him, and was filled with ecstasy. 
However, how long can joy prevail, if one's hands and feet are bound in 
chains? Still, Vasudevji decided that he would donate ten thousand cows. He 
stood beside the Lord, and began to praise Him. 
Now, I will tell you about that tomorrow. 



Om, Shantih! Shantih! Shantih! 



192 



BHAGWATAMRIT 



Pravarchan IX 
(Skandha X) 

When the Lord manifests in the heart of a sadhak*, his condition becomes 
very different. In the sadhana*, it is called 'chitta shuddhi'*. The Lord 
comes as saguna sakar, to benefit the world, and favor His devotees. His 
coming also makes the world, and Nature, very different, very special. 
This is why Shri Shukadevji Maharaj described how the elements became 
absolutely lucid and pleasant, when it was time for the Lord to appear. Not 
only was the external world purified and beautified, even the antahkaran* 
was purified and made beautiful. All the four directions were tranquil. Stars 
sparkled in the sky. A gentle, fragrant breeze began to flow. Fires were 
bright, but gentle. The water in the rivers, ponds, and sea became clean and 
clear, even though it is always murky during the monsoon. All around, the 
world was filled with a glow of happiness. People's hearts were felt free and 
joyful. The souls of the sadhus* and Devtas were full of rapture. This 
description symbolizes that Mother Nature welcomed the Lord on earth, by 
displaying her best, as an offering to Him. 

I had told you, yesterday that Devki represents the subtle intellect, Vasudev 
represents a pure mind, and the combination of these two results in the 
descent of the Lord Shri Krishna. 

You are all aware that the good fortune of the Lord's advent happens only 
after shravan*. Similarly, the Bhadra* follows the Shravan*, and becomes 
bhadra* - ^tfa: fWl: 'bhadram karne^bhih shrunuyaamah'. Bhadra is 
one whose presence gives pleasure. The Krishna paksha* of the 
Bhadramaas* carries the Lord's own name. The Lord manifests in utter 
darkness. 

The eighth tithi* of the Krishna paksha is the middle day. Seven tithes come 
before it, and seven after it. The Lord was born on the tithi in-between. Why 
was the Lord born on the midnight of the eighth tithi? The reason is, because 
the Lord is born in the Chandra Vansha. Nisha* is the principal wife of 
Chandrama, and Chandrama is the Nishanath*. So, the brightness of the 
Lord appears at the peak hour of the night. 

Apart from this, the Rohini nakshatra* is the constellation of the unborn 
Brahma. Balaramji's mother is also called Rohini. These are two reasons 



193 



why the Lord chose that to be the moment of His birth. There are many other 
significant points, but shortage of time does not permit elaboration. 
Vasudev was the first person to see the Lord. He was amazed, and thought, 
"The Lord is born in my house! How wonderful! How amazing! The Lord is 
so tiny! No such baby has ever been born!" 

Tamadbhutam baalakamambuje ^kshanam chaturbhujam 

shankhagadaariayudham, 

Shrivatsalakshmam galashobhitkaustubham peetaambaram 

saandrapayodsaubhagam. 

Mahaarhavaidooryakireetakundalatvishaa parishvaktasahasrakuntalam, 
Uddamakaanchangadakankanaadibhirvirochamaanam vasude \a e ^kshata. 
10.3.9-10. 

Vasudevji said, "This infant is wonderful! His open eyes are like lotuses. 
The eyes of new born babies are always closed. Other babies have two arms, 
but He has four! No doubt His four arms are busy protecting His devotees. 
They bestow the four purusharthas*. The Lord, who enjoys all four states, 
has manifested before me. His four hands hold the Shankha*, Chakra*, 
Gada* and Padma*, and He is wearing all the ornaments." 
The word 'ari', which comes in the second half of the first shloka, indicates 
the Chakra. W^W\ ^fcT 3rrfr: - 'Araa santyasya iti ariti' - chakrah,' 
containing sharp, serrated edges. 

Vasudevji bowed his head and folded his hands, as he saw the Lord. He 
came to the conclusion that this is, indeed, the Lord, and began to eulogize 
Him. 

When something wonderful and pristine is seen, the heart begins to 
appreciate it involuntarily. Perhaps I have told you what Naradji has said, 
"How will the Lord protect you, if you don't recognize Him?' A Devta 
protects his form only when people are aware of him - 3#rf^f ^fr ^nRd 
' 'aviditamde\o nainam bhunakti. ' 

So, Vasudevji said, "Lord, I have recognized You! You are the actual cause 
of this world. You are not just the nimitta*. You are also the stuff the world 
is made of. The specialty of that, which is made, is that it is present in its 
own action. Just as clay is present in a pot, as its upadana*, the Lord is the 



194 



basic stuff this world is made of. Every grain of dust is filled with Him. The 
one, who makes, is the chetan*, and that which is made, is the Sat*. The 
indestructible form of Sat-Chid* is eternal, and is the anandaghan* 
Paramatma. 

If you ask why the Lord can't be seen, the answer is that there are lots of 
things which exist, but cannot be seen. In the same way, the Lord is there, 
but our sense organs lack the capacity to see or recognize Him. When our 
indriyas* are sharpened by Bhakti - Gnan, then they will succeed in seeing 
the presence of the Lord. Ordinary eyes can only see the gross. 
Devki opened her eyes just when Vasudevji completed his stuti. She saw the 
Lord Narayana, and said, "You are the one who abides in our hearts, and 
lights the lamp of spirituality. It is amazing to think that the one in whom the 
entire creation exists, came into my womb! Who in the world will believe 
this? Intelligent people will refuse to accept that there is an Avatar at all! 
However, the Avatar of the Lord is before me - here and now! If there was a 
King who never went anywhere, nor allowed anyone to see him, how would 
people know whether he was dead or alive?" 

So, the Lord is such that He becomes the Creation, He creates the Creation, 
and He sees the Creation. Then He manifests, and gives His devotees a 
vision of Himself. The Avatar is like the steps which enable our hearts to 
descend into the lucid lake of divinity - 3nc|<i<ui 3racTR: 'avataranam 
avataarah '. We can descend into the Brahmahrid* only by means of these 
steps. The Lord, who is seated in our hearts, manifests, so that we can see 
Him with our sense organs, and antahkaran. How could anyone recognize 
the Lord if He did not manifest in an Avatar? 

Devki also said, "Lord, I recognize You, but I am fearful that Kansa may 
come." 

The Lord said, "Both of you spent several births in severe asceticism, to 
attain Me, When I appeared before you to grant a boon, you asked for a son 
like Me. However, there is no one like Me in the world. 

Adrishtvaanyatam loke^ sheelaudaaryagunaih samam. 10.3.41. 

So, how could I give you a son like Myself? Since I could not fulfill your 
demand, I met your request by coming thrice, as your son. A generous 
person who is unable to provide what his guest desires, compensates by 
giving the equivalent three times over. I showed you My chaturbhuj* form, 
to remind you of your past births." 

The Lord then inspired Vasudevji and Devki to take Him to Gokul. 



195 



The fact is that Gokul is fulfilled only when the Lord enters it. The Lord is 
not meant to be kept hidden behind the indriyas. He is not meant to be only 
the subject of meditation. He is meant to play with our sense organs. That is 
why the changing of the Parabrahma Paramatma* into a seemingly ordinary 
person took place. 

The Lord started His Leela as soon as Vasudevji decided to take Him to 
Gokul. He came into Vasudevji's lap, and the chains fell off him. How is it 
possible that a person be bound by worldly chains, when he has the Lord in 
his lap? The handcuffs and chains opened automatically and so did the 
prison gates. 

When Vasudevji began to walk towards Gokul, the Lord's vimukhjana- 
mohini Maya* appeared in Mathura. A slight drizzle of rain started, 
prompting the people sleeping outdoors to pick up their beds, and go 
indoors. The streets were empty, and the Lord passed out of the city. The 
Lord Shesha protected Him from the drizzle, with his hoods. 
When Yamunaji* saw this, she thought, "This serpent is entering my waters. 
I already have one serpent living in my waters - and now one more is 
coming. What can I do to stop him?" She increased her flow, thinking, "I 
will wash him away with the force of the current." Then she saw the Lord, 
and thought, "If I do anything impudent, how will the Lord marry me?" 
As you know, the Lord will, later on, marry Kalindiji*. She is His sweetheart 
even at Vraja, and becomes His fourth principal Queen when she flows into 
the sea and reaches Dwarka. 

So, Kalindi bared her heart to the Lord. She dried up in such a way that the 
water was just knee deep in some places, thigh deep in some places, and just 
up to the ankles in some places. Vasudevji crossed the river quite easily. 
When he reached Gokul, the Lord's swajana-mohini Maya induced all the 
doors of Nanda Bhavan* to open. Yashoda Maiya* went into a deep sleep, 
and so did all the people in Gokul. 

You will not find a God like this in any other religious sect; a God who 
comes, Himself, into the house of one who sleeps. The Lord, who comes 
into the house of a sleeping person, is called saguna sakar, a compassionate 
Lord. He is entering a house which has no japa, no dhyana, no samadhi, and 
no sadhan. He is coming to someone who is fast asleep! 
Vasudevji placed the Lord near Yashoda Maiya, and picked up Maya, who 
slept beside her, and took Maya back to Mathura. The Lord thought to 
Himself, "My devotee is leaving Me, and taking My Maya instead! And the 
one to whom I have come, sleeps unconcerned. There is no welcome for Me. 
How strange that My coming evokes no reaction at all!" 



196 



So, the Lord began to cry! His crying woke Yashoda Maiya, but I will speak 
of this later. First, let us go to Mathura with Vasudevji. 
When Vasudevji returned to Kansa's prison with Maya, do you know what 
happened? When the Lord had come into his lap, all his shackles had opened 
miraculously, but as soon as he returned with Maya, he was shackled again. 
As soon as Vasudevji was shackled, Maya began to cry. The guards woke up 
and informed Kansa. Kansa was just waiting for this news. He rushed, bare 
footed, and bare headed, with a naked sword in his hand, to the prison. 
Seeing him, Devki thought, "My son has been saved by this little baby girl. 
It is only proper that I try to protect her, if I can." She pleaded with Kansa, 
to spare the little one, but he was not the type who would bother about 
piteous appeals! He picked up Maya Devi*, and tried to smash her on a rock. 
Instead of falling, Maya Devi rose up into the sky. Later on, she became 
famous as the Vindhyavasini Devi. 

Kansa was embarrassed. He began, at first, to speak of Vedanta, to Devki- 
Vasudev, saying, "Who kills whom? The Atma is eternal, everlasting, ever 
unattached, and it never dies. I have, however, been very unjust to you. 
Please forgive me." 

Kansa's thinking was lofty, while he was in the presence of Vasudev-Devki. 
It changed as soon as he returned to his own house, and the company of his 
wicked Ministers. His crooked advisers said, "Sir, since the Devi told you 
that the one who will kill you is born, isn't it better that we kill all small 
children?" Kansa accepted their advice, and told them to go ahead. Injustice, 
however, is short-lived. Only those who are coming rapidly closer to death, 
choose untruth, injustice and cheating. Ultimately, they destroy themselves. 
Now, come to Nandababa's house in Gokul. When the baby began to cry, 
Yashoda woke up and so did her attendants. They were overjoyed to see the 
baby. The words poured out, 3TH^ wfi "Nanda ke^ ananda bhayo'. 
When Nandababa heard these words, and learnt that a son had been born, he 
was filled with immeasurable joy. 

One principle is proved here - the Lord is not necessarily the son of the 
person through whom He takes birth. The Lord's status as a child is through 
the feeling of paternal/maternal love for Him. Similarly, those who love Him 
as their Master, friend, or sweetheart, obtain Him as their Master, friend, or 
sweetheart. The Lord is obtained through deep feeling. In the Gita, He has 
vowed - ^ Wfi ttt WF?t ?m?T^cr %hiu|!^ l ye^ yathaa maam prapadyante^ 
taanstathaiva bhajaamyaham '. That is why Shri Shukadevji Maharaj says, 

Nandastvaatmaja utpanne ' jaataahlaado mahaamanaah. 



197 



10.5.1. 



You see, Vasudev-Devki were unable to develop a firm conviction that the 
Lord was their son, because He had appeared before them in His four-armed 
form. They felt diffident about considering the four-armed Lord their son. In 
Nanda-Yashoda's house, however, the Lord came as an ordinary baby, and 
they were fully convinced that He is their little son. 

As a matter of fact, in our Vaishnav Sampradaya*, it is believed that two 
Krishnas manifested - one in the prison at Mathura, and one at Yashoda 
Maiya's house. When Vasudevji took his Krishna to Gokul, He merged into 
His other form, which had manifested in Gokul. The Vallabh Sampradaya 
and the Chaitanya Sampradaya accept this theory, but none of the others 
accept it. 

So, Nandababa believed totally that the Lord was his son. The Vaishnavas in 
South India believe that the Shri Krishna born in the prison, refused to leave 
His mother, Devki, and go to Gokul. For twelve years, He remained with 
her, unknown to others. Mother Devki would breast-feed Him, feed Him, 
and pamper Him. Devki 's heart would have been broken, had she known 
that her darling child was not with her. This is written in the Tamil Bhagwat. 
Whatever the case may be, when Nandababa learnt that a son was born, he 
immediately sent for Brahmins, who were well versed with the Vedas. He 
asked them to undertake all the rituals. Our preachers in Vraja* describe this 
in great detail. They dance, jump, laugh, and play with joy, as they narrate 
this, spending two or three hours on this episode. 

The learned Brahmins chanted the Svasti Vaachan*. Nandababa opened up 
his treasury in elation, and gave daan* with all generosity. It is an indication 
of a lacking of joy, when a person remains tight-fisted on a happy occasion. 
Happiness relaxes all tensions and brings magnanimity. 
Nandababa began to donate whatever the Brahmins desired. He gave silver 
to those who asked for silver; gold to those who wanted gold; pearls and 
diamonds to those who wanted these. Some people felt that they had 
foolishly asked for too little. They threw away what they had taken, and 
joined the queue again, to ask for something of greater value. 
People flocked to Nandababa, to procure whatever they wanted, since 
Nandababa was giving everybody whatever they asked for. He made little 
mounds of til*, covered them with jewel studded gold, and donated them. He 
donated cows in large numbers. 

Jeev Goswami says that Nandababa donated two million cows, on this happy 
occasion. Shridhar Swami says he donated two hundred thousand. Thus, 
although the Mahatmas give different figures, the fact remains that 



198 



Nandababa was open handed in giving, and all Vraja was filled with joy and 
exuberance. The Panegyrists sang praises, and others did stuti. 
They said that Nandababa noticed that Rohiniji was not participating in the 
celebrations. He went to her and said, "Lala* is yours! Why do you sit all 
alone? Come - celebrate the birth of your son!" Rohiniji used to follow the 
social custom of not dressing up, or participating in celebrations, without her 
husband. On this occasion, however, she did participate, at Nandababa's 
urging. 

Laxmiji is where the Lord is, so she left Vaikunth, and spread herself all 

over Vraja - <HifhkH*g T T 'ramaakreedamabhoonnripa '. 

Laxmiji rides on an 'ullu'*, when she goes alone to people. Her mount is an 

owl, which indicates that when she goes unaccompanied by the Lord, she 

makes a fool of them, and comes back. When she is accompanied by the 

Lord, they travel on the Garuda, and she gives - and gets - great joy. 

After the festivities were over, Nandababa felt that Kansa should also be 

pampered with gifts. He went to Mathura to pay the Annual taxes, putting up 

camp there, for some days. After paying his taxes, he went to meet 

Vasudevji. 

This meeting between Nanda and Vasudevji is described beautifully in the 
Bhagwat. Vasudevji never allowed Nanda to see his sorrow, that so many 
sons had been killed, his daughter had flown away, and they had been put 
into prison by Kansa. He was happy for Nandababa, and said, 'Nandaji, you 
were disheartened that you did not have a child for so many years. It is 
God's Grace that you now have a son. A grihastha* is happy, when his 
whole family is happy - he can never be happy selfishly. So, we are all 
extremely happy at your good fortune." 

Nandababa, however, did not speak of his own happiness. He said, 
'Vasudevji, I know that you were put into prison, your sons were killed, and 
your daughter flew into the sky. We share your sorrow." 
This episode has something important to teach. It is not proper to talk only 
about ourselves, when we meet people. Our talk should be suited to the 
condition of the person we talk to. That is why Nandababa saw Vasudevji's 
sorrow, and Vasudevji saw Nandababa's joy. 

Then Vasudevji said, "Nandaji, please return as quickly as possible, because 
many upheavals are happening at Gokul." 

Nandababa knew that Vasudevji was a man of truth, so what he said could 
never be false. The Yoga Darshan states that if Truth is established in the life 
of a person, his words come true. He does not need to try to make his 
predictions come true - ^Or^rafcTWTT f^TTWrT^Rc^FT ' satyapratishthaayaam 



199 



kriyaafalaashrayatvam. ' The words of a truthful man are always true, and 
proved to be right. 

Nandababa felt very anxious, when he heard these words. He immediately 
broke camp and headed for home. It is natural for a man of truth to surrender 
to the Lord, when he senses danger. Just the memory of the Lord protects us 
from all danger - ^rfcT: ^ferafg^FFT 'harismriti 

sarvavipadavimokshanam. ' 

Putana*, the demoness, arrived at Vraja. She had been sent by Kansa. You 
must have heard this episode before. Shri Vallabhacharya Maharaj says that 
Putana represents Avidya. 

3#IWT TTrffT TOT *F%IH Miffed I I 

Avidyaa pootana nashtaa gandhamaatraavashe ^shitaa. 

She kidnaps pure hearted infants, which is why she is called 'Putana' — T TrRlft' 
^rfcT pootaanapi nayati'. Putana is an astrological sign which affects 
infants, according to the descriptions in the scriptures. The Baal Samhita 
describes the ritual for negating its effect. 

Putana was a demoness by birth. She had a terrible nature. She would kill 
infants by drinking their blood. Kansa sent her to Gokul. Once there, she 
donned a beautiful appearance, as lovely as Laxmi. She wore malati* 
flowers in her hair, and carried a lotus in her hand, when she entered Gokul. 
The Lord prompted her to enter no other house, but His, so that no other 
baby would be harmed. Those who saw her were bewitched by her beauty. 
Nobody stopped her from going into Nandababa' s house. 
As soon as she entered, Putana saw the tiny Lord, Shyamsunder*, sleeping 
on the bed. He had not yet teethed. Mother Rohini sat on one side, and 
Yashoda Maiya on the other side of His bed. Both were looking at Him with 
deep happiness. 

Putana also felt a spurt of happiness when she saw this scene, but she had 
come with a terrible intention. She said, "Oh - have you never had children? 
This baby is hungry, and both of you are just sitting there, looking at him!" 
Saying this, she quickly lifted the Lord onto her lap. Yashoda Maiya was 
delighted that this beautiful stranger had so much love for her son. A mother 
feels goodwill for those who show goodwill to her children. 
The Lord shut His eyes, when Putana lifted Him onto her lap. Shri Harisuri 
has written a book called 'Hari Bhaktirasayan', which gives a dozen 
imagines reasons for the Lord's shutting His eyes at this point. You can 
enjoy some of them. 



200 



The Lord thought, "Putana has no good deeds to her credit in this lifetime. 
Let Me check if she has any in a past life." The Lord shut His eyes to 
meditate upon this. Another reason could be that the Lord felt, "Putana has 
come as a Mother, to feed Me, but has dressed up like a wife, so I should not 
see her face." A third reason, "Putana deserves neither the Dakshinayan* nor 
Uttarayan* path after her death", so He shut both His eyes. A fourth 
interpretation is that the Lord thought, "I had come to Vraja to have curds, 
milk and butter; but now I will have to drink poison, instead. So, it's best I 
shut My eyes." 

Apart from Shri Harisuri, Shri Vallabhacharya has given five or six 
imaginary reasons, and Shri Jeeva Goswami has imagined another six or 
seven. The Mahatmas thus narrate about twenty or twenty five reasons for 
the Lord's shutting His eyes. The Lord, however, is just a baby, and it is 
natural for a baby to shut his eyes. 

When Putana pushed her poisoned nipple into the mouth of the Lord, He 
began to suckle lustily. A baby has no inkling about who is good, and who is 
bad. It is natural for a baby to start drinking, no matter who feeds him. 
Putana became frantic, when the Lord began to suck her life, and cried out, 
"Leave me-^^T! 'Muncha! Muncha! " 

The mantra 1 T?i^ "putane ' muncha muncha ' is used to free a person 

ensnared by the spirit of Putana. 

Hence, when this baby grabbed Putana, she began to chant this mantra, 
saying, "Child! Leave me! Leave me! Muncha - muncha!" But the Lord 
said, "Putana, I do know how to catch people, but I do not know how to let 
them go. I have never left anyone I caught. How can I leave you?" 
Then Putana fell dead, and her original, massive form returned. Preachers 
say that she was terrible to look at, and so huge that her limbs stretched far 
and wide. The area where her haath* fell, came to be called Hathras. The 
area where her alaks* fell, became Aligarh, and the area where her garal* 
fell, became Agra. Her heavy body brought down the trees in an area of six 
kosas*, as she fell. 

When the Gopis saw the huge form of Putana lying on the ground, and the 
Lord playing happily on her chest, they went to pick Him, and bring Him 
down, without any vestige of fear. Then they began to chant the Lord's 
names, to protect their Lala. First, they applied the dust from the hooves of 
cows on Him, and then bathed Him with the cows' urine. Then they put a 
tilak* of cow dung on His forehead, and swung a cow's tail over Him, in a 
circle. When they finished these rituals of protection, it dawned on them that 
they had forgotten to purify themselves (after having touched the corpse of 
Putana) before doing all the purification mantras. So they purified 



201 



themselves by touching water and chanting purification mantras, and then 
they repeated all the rituals to protect the baby Shri Krishna. 
Yashoda Maiya simply couldn't believe that her baby was alive and 
unharmed. She stood in a stupor, on one side. Seeing her condition, the 
Gopis asked, "Maiya, have you had a dream? Your Lala hasn't gone 
anywhere - come and see for yourself." They laid Him on His bed, and 
Maiya saw Him playing happily, as usual. Maiya said, "Even now, I can 
hardly believe that the demoness has not cast some spell." She relaxed only 
after she lifted Him onto her lap, and He began to suckle her hungrily. Then 
she took Him around, placing Him in the lap of each Gopi, and saying that it 
was her blessing which had protected her Lala. 

Now, give your attention to this episode, for it is an episode of the Lord's 
Grace. A point to be considered is that when the Lord Graces even a 
demoness who came to give Him poison, what would He bestow upon the 
cows and milkmaids, who feed Him so lovingly? Then the position of His 
mother is supreme! It would not be at all surprising if the Lord gave Himself 
to her forever. Can anyone calculate the blessings His mother would obtain, 
when even Putana obtained salvations? The fact is that the greatness of a 
mother's love is beyond description. 

Another point to be considered is that when even Putana was granted 
liberation, what will the Lord grant to those who lovingly consider Him their 
beloved child? The Lord was not bothered by the fact that Putana was a 
demoness who had come to kill Him. He focused only upon the fact that she 
had fed Him, the way a mother breast feeds her baby. He ignored the poison, 
and saw motherly love. 

Even today, the Lord can undoubtedly grant salvation to anyone who has 
feelings for Him - whatever the nature of the feeling may be. Even those 
who hate Him can receive salvation. 

After Putana, came Shakatasura*. It was the day of the Lord's astrological 
birth sign, and it was the day He turned on His side for the first time. 
Yashoda Maiya was busy with all the good tasks, after bidding farewell to 
the Brahmins. She placed her Lala under a cart, and began to greet her 
guests. Lala saw that while others were being welcomed, He was not given 
even a proper place to sleep! "I have been placed under a cart; an inanimate 
object has been placed above Me!" 

To place an inanimate object above the animate is the same as placing 
money above humans. A person is always greater than an object - objects 
are not more important than people. The animate is greater than the 
inanimate. The material should not be placed above the human. 



202 



But that day, the inanimate was placed above the animate, and large pots 
containing milk, curds, butter and ghee* were placed on the cart. My dear, is 
any substance sweeter than the Lord, that it should be placed over Him? So, 
Yashoda's Lai* cried, and said, "What is happening here?" He just touched 
the cart with His lotus like feet. He did not become immense, like the 
Trivikram*, nor hard like the Narasimha. He retained His tender, infant 
form, with the same soft feet. Still, the cart toppled over with the mere touch 
of His feet. All the milk, curd, butter and ghee spilled on the ground. This 
caused everybody to turn away from everything else, and look at the little 
Lala who had overturned the heavily laden cart. This is called 'nirodh'*. 
This is why Shri Vallabhacharya Maharaj calls the tenth Skandha of the 
Bhagwat, the Nirodh Skandha. 

Kasya nirodhah? Bhaktasya. 
Kasmin niodhah? Bhagavati. 
Ke^na nirodha? Bhagavataa. 

The meaning of this is: Who does nirodh apply to? It applies to the Bhakta. 
Where is nirodh? In the Lord. Who does the nirodh? The Lord, Himself, 
does it. His Leelas are such that the minds of His devotees are drawn 
irresistibly towards Him. 

Yashoda Maiya felt that it was the affect of some malevolent stars. She 
picked up her darling child, who was crying, and began to feed Him. 
Nandababa told the Brahmins to undertake some rituals, and bless the little 
Lala. He had faith that the blessings of Brahmins are never in vain. 
One day, Yashoda Maiya had her Lala in her lap. Suddenly, she felt that He 
was too heavy for her. She wondered how her little one suddenly felt so 
heavy. Unable to hold Him any longer, she placed Him on the ground, 
returning to her chores, and thinking about the Lord. 

A great whirlwind arose just then, and lifted Yashoda Nandan* high into the 
air. The Lord would let Trinavarta* lift Him as high as he wished, but would 
not let him move in the direction of Kansa. Then, Nanda Nandan* caught 
hold of Trinavarta' s neck, and hung upon it. Trinavarta began to wonder 
what this weight was. He thought that perhaps it is a rock from the Neelgiri 
Mountain, which was heavier than him. The Lord said, "I am a little child, I 
do not know anybody. I just catch the neck of whoever picks Me up. If this 



203 



causes your death, so be it! It is not My fault. I am doing what any child 
would do." 

Shri Vallabhacharyaji Maharaj has described Trinavarta as a great demon. 
He states that it was lust personified, who came as the wind, to swoop up 
Shri Krishna, and carry Him off. 

So, when Trinavarta thought that he had accidentally picked up a rock, he 
fell. He landed on a rock close to the Eastern entrance of Nanda Bhavan, and 
died. 

The Gopis ran to lift the child. They were convinced that the blessings of the 
Brahmins had protected their Lala. The wicked had been killed by his own 
wickedness, and their innocent little Lala had been protected. 
Now Yashoda Maiya could not bear to leave her Lala for a minute. One day, 
she placed Him on her lap, and began to feed Him. To save her Lala even 
the slightest effort, she pushed her nipple into His mouth, and her milk 
began to flow. 

E^kadaarbhakamaadaaya svaankamaaropaya bhaaminee, 
Prasnutam paayayaamaasa stanam sne ^hapariplutaa. 
10.7.34. 

A mother's love is unique - not to be found anywhere else in the world. It is 
her intangible love which flows forth in the form of milk. Love has no 
physical form. It is an intangible emotion which resides in the heart. In a 
mother's heart, however, it takes on the tangible form of milk, and enters the 
mouth of her baby. A baby is a piece of the mother's heart. If, however, she 
denies her milk to her child, how can she expect that he will be obedient, or 
protect the culture? 

When Yashoda Maiya' s milk continued to flow into Lala's mouth, she felt 
anxious lest He drink too much, and get indigestion. She tried to make Him 
smile. She began to smile at Him, and kiss His face. The Lord thought, 
"Now My Mother is reluctant to feed Me any more." He yawned. Maiya saw 
the three worlds in the Lord's mouth. Her head began to reel. The Lord told 
her, "Maiya, your milk is not drunk by just Me. The whole world is drinking 
your milk. Look into My mouth - you will see the entire world." 

Vishvam vibhaagi payasoasya na ke\aloaham, 



204 



Asmaadadashi harinaa kimu vishvamaaste \ 

The Lord displayed the whole world in His mouth, but Maiya said, "My 
little one is sleeping in my lap. He has a tiny mouth, and a waist which is 
hardly bigger than my fist. How is it possible that I see the world in his little 
stomach? My wicked eyes are playing tricks, and deluding me. It is simply 
my drishti-srishti*, and not srishti-drishti*". With these thoughts, Maiya shut 
her eyes. 

You see, the Lord's Yoga Maya tries repeatedly, to show her power and 
magnificence, but the strength of the devotees' love renders her efforts 
unsuccessful. Yashoda Maiya is astonished to see all this, but it does not 
really affect her in any way. 

When the Lord gave Yashoda Maiya a glimpse of His Creation, in His 
mouth, she saw His immense form. Now, the name and the form always go 
together. So, Vasudevji was inspired to organize the namakaran sanskar*, 
for his son at Gokul. These religious sanskars are required to bring culture 
and righteousness into our lives. This is the reason why so much importance 
has been given to the different rituals done on different occasions in our 
lives. Even today, they are undertaken in the homes of the cultured. The 
sanskars are many, like the garbhadhan* sanskar, the punsavan* sanskar, the 
seemantopanayan* sanskar, the jatakarma* sanskar, etc. etc. It is only by 
these sanskars that the vikaras* are overcome. 

Prompted by Vasudevji, Shri Gargacharyaji Maharaj came to Gokul, with 
the intention of undertaking the namakaran sanskar of Nanda Nandan. He 
was a highly learned ascetic. As soon as Nandababa saw him, he said, "Shri 
Gargacharyaji' s coming to our house is just as though the Lord has come!" 
He welcomed Gargacharyaji with full respect, and then said, "Sir, you are a 
great astrologer. Please give a suitable name to my son." 
Gargacharyaji replied, "You see, Nandaji, I am the purohit of the 
Yaduvanshis. If I undertake the naming ceremony publicly, it will arouse 
suspicion in the mind of the evil Kansa. He will suspect that your son is 
actually the child of Vasudevji. wft Tl^r qmrn^ I 'Paapi sarvatra 
paapamaashankate " - it is the nature of a wicked person to suspect others of 
being wicked. Even if there is nothing wrong, the wickedness in the heart 
clouds his thinking and he begins to see wickedness everywhere." 
Nandababa immediately understood the implication, and said, "You desire to 
undertake the ceremony secretly, to ensure that Kansa does not come to hear 
of it. That is fine. Our cowshed is a place where no outsider comes. Come - 
let us go and sit there. We do not even need to purify the area by plastering 
diluted cow dung. Please do not bother about elaborate ritualism. The cows 



205 



are all Devtas, superior to all other demi-gods. Please, just do the Svasti 
Vaachan there, and then the namakaran sanskar." 

Gargacharyaji Maharaj did the ritual. He named the elder brother Balaram. 
He also gave him the name Sankarshan and a few other names as well. For 
the younger brother, he gave the names Vasudev*, Krishna, and others. 
Everyone at home rejoiced. Rohini and Yashoda began to pamper their sons 
in every way. Soon, both brothers learnt to crawl on all fours. They would 
crawl into the pile of cow dung, play with cow dung and cow urine! Their 
bodies would be covered with these substances, but their mothers would 
laughingly pick them up. They would never say - "Go and bathe, first. Then 
we will take you in our laps." Vatsalya* is defined by the mother taking 
pleasure in the flaws of the one dependent on her. 

Aashritajanadoshabhogyataapaadanam vaatsalyam. 

It is said that when Surdasji* met Shri Vallabhacharya, he started to sing his 
famous song — ^ft TTR" ^ld<n wft 'mo sama kaun kutil khala kaami'*. 
Hearing this, Shri Vallabhacharya Maharaj said, "Surdas, why are you so 
full of woe? Sing some other song." 
Surdasji asked, "Sir, what should I sing?" 

Shri Vallabhacharyaji Maharaj said, "Sing about the Leela of the Lord." 
Surdasji' s whole tone changed, and he began to sing joyfully. 

^I?T WT 3TFH, ^ #T #T I I 

'Sobhita kara navaneeta liye \ 

Ghuturuvana chalata syaam mani aangana, mukha dadhi le^pa kiye \ ' 

This Leela sung by Surdasji is not imagined. It is a factual Leela. Surdasji 
was physically blind, but he had the vision of the Lord's Leelas with his 
mind's eye, and he described them. The saints - who are also poets - have 
been seeing and describing the innumerable Leelas of the Lord. 
Shri Krishna started doing all kinds of mischief at home. He would eat up 
the butter, when Maiya was busy elsewhere. Maiya would see the butter on 
His face and hands, and ask, "What have you been up to?" Shri Krishna 
would answer, "Maiya, My hand began to burn because of the red stone you 
make Me wear. I put My hand into the butter to cool it." Maiya would say, 
"Very well, you put your hand in the pot of butter to cool it. But how is the 
butter smeared on your mouth?" The Lord would reply, "A fly sat on My 



206 



lips. The butter was smeared when I brushed it off with My hand." Maiya 
knew perfectly well what had happened. She would just smile. 
You see, we are talking about the Baal* Leela. It shows how little children 
laugh, play, and talk at home. You may keep meditating on your Ishwara, 
but the nirakar*, nirvikar*, nirguna*, nirdharmak* Lord will not enter your 
heart. However, if you see the Lord as a child, you will obtain so much 
pleasure that all worldly thoughts and considerations will be forgotten. 
Shri Krishna's Baal Leela then extended beyond His home. He started to go 
to the homes of other Gopis, and indulge in similar pranks. Although the 
Gopis desired Him eagerly, they would land up at Nanda Bhavan, 
complaining to Yashoda Maiya, about all the mischief of her Lala. Even as 
they complained, their eyes would rest lovingly upon Shri Krishna. Mother 
Yashoda would observe all this, understand how matters stood, and smile. 
You see, when you listen to the Leela of the Lord, you should not try to 
evaluate the right and wrong by worldly standards. These Leelas are meant 
to help us meditate upon the Lord. Shri Shukadevji Maharaj did not speak 
about the truth and falsehood, when he described the Lord's Leelas. He just 
described how the Gopis would complain to Yashoda. He did not, on his 
own, speak about any incident of stealing. He restricted himself to 
describing the Gopis' allegations. He said, "I have only seen the Gopis 
complaining. Only they knew how true or false their words were. I know 
nothing about it." 

The mother, who loves her child so deeply, also gets annoyed with him at 
times. However, her anger is aroused only when he does anything which can 
harm him in any way. 

Many such occasions came to Yashoda. One day, Shri Krishna ate some 
mud. The gwaal baal* told Yashoda Maiya. She went to Him at once, 
catching His right hand with her left hand, and brandishing a cane in her 
right hand. She demanded, 'Well, Lala! Have you eaten mud?" 

Kasmaanmridamadaantaatman bhavaan bhakshitavaan rahah, 
Vadanti taavakaa hye 7e ' kumaaraaste ^agrajoppayam. 
10.8.34. 

Shri Krishna denied having eaten mud. Maiya told Him that all His friends 
said that He had eaten some. Shri Krishna said that they were all telling lies. 
Maiya told Him that even Dau Dada* said so, and Shri Krishna reiterated 
that they were all telling lies. "Maiya, I do not see that I ate anything, 



207 



because nothing exists but Me. The jeeva is ignorant. So what, if they think I 
have eaten? If you believe that they are speaking the truth, look into My 
mouth - 

Naaham bhakshitavaanamba sarve " mithyaabhishansinah, 
Yadi satyagirastarhi samaksham pashay me " mukham. 
10.8.35." 

The cleverness behind Shri Krishna's words was that Maiya had shut her 
eyes, when she had looked into His mouth earlier, and would do the same 
again. However, this time Maiya did not close her eyes. So, she saw the 
entire Creation in Shri Krishna's little mouth, when He opened it wide. She 
dropped her cane, and said, "Just see - what is all this in my Laala's mouth? 
Am I seeing a dream? Is this an illusion, or is my Lala, Ishwara?" 
Now Shri Krishna thought, "If Maiya thinks that I am Ishwara, she won't 
take Me onto her lap, or feed Me. She will place Me on a throne, and do 
arti*." So, He quickly shut His mouth, and asked, "Maiya, are you My 
Maiya or not?" 

Maiya replied, "Yes, son, I am only your Maiya," and she took Him into her 
lap. Shri Shukadevji Maharaj says, 

Tryya chopanishadbhishcha saankhyogaishcha saatvataih, 
Upageeyamaanamahaatmyam harim saamanyataatmajam. 
10.8.45. 

"Parikshit, see the good fortune of Yashoda Maiya. She loves and pampers, 
as her child, the Lord who is praised by all the Vedas, and Shastras. 
At this point, Raja Parikshit asked, "Sir, please tell me how did Nanda- 
Yashoda get such good fortune. What vrat or tapa did they undertake, that 
the Lord, Himself, came as their son?" 

Now see, where can we obtain the Lord? We obtain Him in the lap of our 
hearts. He is as far from us as we think Him to be, and as close as we feel 
Him to be. The fact that the Lord is neither far nor near - He is everywhere, 
and hungry for emotion. He meets us according to our feelings for Him. 
Shri Shukadevji Maharaj told Parikshit that Brahmaji told Dronavasu to go 
to the Earth, with his wife Dhara*. Dronavasu prayed, "Sir, let us always 



208 



have love for the Lord, when we are born on Earth. Please let us have the 
opportunity to love Him." It is the same Dronavasu and Dhara, who became 
Nanda-Yashoda. They reside permanently in the Land of the Lord, in the 
form of raagatmika bhakti*, but the Lord manifested as an ordinary child, 
and received their love. 

So, Nanda-Yashoda did not obtain the Lord by any vrata or worship. They 
obtained Him by the blessings of a Mahapurush*. Prajapati blessed them, 
saying, "The Lord will be your son", and the Lord became their son. 
Shri Shukadevji Maharaj said, "Parikshit, God can be obtained by the 
blessings of Mahatmas, but He cannot be obtained through japa, tapa, or 
vrata. You are amazed at the episode of Maiya's picking up a cane, to make 
the Lord spit out the mud out of His mouth, but - just see - one day Maiya 
tied the Lord to an ukhal*. 

*nft ^7T% 4?#T d^M^ftdlln ^ I 
<W<-d1 dM'IWd I I 

^te^fwf ^id^W ^ i 

E^kadaa grihadaaseeshu Yashodaa nandage^hinee, 
Karmaantaraniyuktaasu nirmamantha svayam dadhi. 
Yaani yaaneeha geetaani tadbaalacharitaani cha, 
Dadhinirmanthane^ kale^ smarantee taanyagaayata. 
Kshaumam vaasah prithukatitate x vibhratee sootranaddham, 
Putrasne ^hasnutakuchayugam jaatakampam cha subhrooh. 
Rajjvaakarshramabhujachalatkankanau kundale " cha, 
Svinnam vaktram kabaravigalanmaalatee nirmamantha. 10.9. 1-3 

How deep is the love of a mother, and how can she leave this piece of her 
heart, to servants? Yashoda Maiya instructed her servants to attend to 
various tasks, including the ritual worship of Indra, and she began to churn 
the curd, for her Lala. While she churned, she thought of His antics - "just 
see how he asked for the moon to play with, like a ball! How obstinate he 
became that day!" Thus, Maiya would talk about His virtues, cherish His 
memory in her mind, and use her hands to churn curds to produce butter for 
Him to eat. 



209 



Describing the scene, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj said that Maiya was wearing 
a silken garment, with a girdle round her waist. There were pots of different 
shapes and sizes around her, as she sat churning the curd. Her exertions 
caused the jasmine flowers in her hair to fall, and beads of perspiration 
appeared on her face. 

We cannot have a vision of the Lord, until we have a vision like this, of His 
devotee. The Lord hovers round His devotees. I ask you a straight question - 
do you believe that there is, in this world, at least one person who has had a 
vision of the Lord? If you believe that no body at all has seen the Lord, then 
you will not be able to believe that you can see Him either. If you are 
convinced that nobody has attained Him, well - what special qualities do 
you have, which would qualify you to obtain His vision? 
After seeing Yashoda Maiya, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj saw the Lord 
sleeping on the bed. The Gopis had come at night, so Yashoda Maiya told 
them to watch over her Lala, while she went to set the curd. When we set the 
curd ourselves, we take care to ensure that it does not become sour. It is 
important to see how rich the milk is, and the quality of the curd used to 
make it set. It is not proper to use just any curd, to set the milk. The curd 
used should be pure, the milk should be pure, and our hands should be pure 
- only then does the curd become tasty. 

So, when Yashoda Maiya went to set the curd, Shri Krishna wanted the 
Gopis to think that He had fallen asleep. He began to breathe deeply, and the 
Gopis felt that He was fast asleep. They began to converse softly. Shri 
Krishna loves to hear what the Gopis discuss. So, when He shuts His eyes, 
to hear their talk, His eyes wish to open; and even though He tries to control 
His skin, it tingles with love. He pretends that He is asleep, so that He can 
hear their unguarded words of love for Him. Thus, the nights passed. 
When Shri Krishna awoke at dawn, He did not see Maiya in the room. 
Where did she go? He called out, "Maiya! O, Maiya!" Then He yawned, and 
stretched Himself, twisted a little on the bed, rubbed His eyes, causing the 
kajal* to spread all over His face. He sat up in bed, with His legs swinging 
down the side. Every day, Maiya would wash His face and hands, but she 
did not come that day. Where did she go? Just then, He glanced to one side, 
and saw her churning the curd. Shri Krishna got off the bed at once, and 
went over to her, saying, "Maiya, I want to drink milk." Maiya, however, 
was so intent on what she was doing, that she did not heed Him. The Lord 
sprawled on the floor, with displeasure. 

See the good fortune of Maiya - the total, complete Grace of the Poorna* 
Brahman is on her. The Lord is eager to drink her milk, and rolling with 
impatience upon the floor. Maiya just had to take Him onto her lap. She 



210 



stopped churning the curd. What is the need to churn the milky ocean, when 
the elixir is procured? Maiya began to feed, and Shri Krishna began to drink. 
Just then, the milk which was being heated started to boil over. Maiya said, 
"This is the precious milk of the special cow." The milk of a thousand cows 
was fed to a hundred cows. The milk of those hundred cows was then fed to 
ten cows, and the milk of those ten cows was then fed to this special cow 
called Padmagandha*, and she provided the milk for Shri Krishna. "What 
will I give Shri Krishna, if the milk overflows?" thought Maiya. "Let me 
save the milk first, and then I will feed Lala. My milk will remain intact for 
him, anyway." So, Maiya placed Shri Krishna aside, and went to save the 
milk. 

The episode shows that sometimes, we have to put aside the one we love, for 
the sake of something our loved one loves. It is a sign of love when the one 
who loves protects the things which are useful for the loved one. 
And then, the milk is itself a Bhakta of many births. Nobody knows how 
many previous births the milk has had. It was born as grass, and went into 
the stomach of the cow. It became milk and was heated upon a fire. It was 
burning, practicing asceticism. It saw that the Lord was drinking His 
mother's milk - He would fill Himself with His mother's milk. "So, it is 
better that I commit suicide," thought the milk, and began to boil over onto 
the fire. 

But Maiya couldn't contain herself. She left her Lala, and picked up the pot 
of boiling milk. When she returned, Shri Krishna was not there, where she 
had left Him. Where did He go, then? 
At this point, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj has described how Shri Krishna got 
angry, because Maiya left Him. Don't be taken aback at the word, 'anger' 
being used, because it is natural that He should get angry, when Maiya 
interrupted His feeding. See the love behind the anger. Would this love have 
been revealed, had He continued to lie in bed, instead of coming to Maiya 
for her milk? Would His love have been revealed, had He not got angry that 
His mother left Him before He drank to His satisfaction? This is an example 
of how much the Lord loves His devotees. It is also an example of how the 
blessings of great people can bestow the great good fortune of having the 
chance to feed the Lord, Himself, with the nectarine milk of a mother. This 
episode reveals the importance of three factors - the effect of being blessed 
by a great person, the love a devotee has for the Lord, and the love the Lord 
has, for His devotees. 

Another viewpoint is that anyone who succumbs to kama, krodha and lobha, 
will suffer - even if it is the Lord, Himself. He will get worldly bondage. So, 



211 



it is essential that a sadhak* should be alert constantly. When these evils 
come even to the Lord, it is obvious that nobody is exempt from them. 
Also, it is seen that the Lord accepts even kama-krodha-lobha, for the sake 
of pleasing His devotees. He allows Himself to be tied by them. What can 
one say, about the foolishness of those who prefer to love any other, instead 
of loving such a Lord as this? 

Shri Krishna broke the ancient pot, which had once belonged to Yashoda 
Maiya's grandmother-in-law. The quantity of milk which had spilled was so 
much that it seemed as though a new milky ocean had appeared in Nanda 
Bhavan! Then - as if Shri Krishna went to Yashoda Maiya and asked, "What 
is a child to do, if his mother does not look after him?" Saying this, He went 
and sat on an upturned ukhal. He got the company of the khala*. He began 
to eat stale butter. He would eat a little and give most of it to monkeys. 
Just then, Maiya came to the scene, and said, "My son has become very 
clever at stealing things! OK, I will teach him a lesson today." She began to 
tiptoe towards him. However, Shri Krishna got a glimpse of the cane in her 
hand. He jumped down from the pounding stone, and fled in fear. Maiya 
chased Him. Shri Krishna was running ahead, and Maiya was running after 
him. Visualize the scene! But remember, also, that so long as we hold on to 
any material object, and hold material objects in our heart, we shall not 
succeed in catching the Chaitanya*; we cannot obtain the Lord. 
Then the Lord thought, "If My Bhakta is seen to be incapable of catching 
Me, how will the Bhakti Sampraday continue to flourish? The Bhakti 
Sampradaya flourishes only when the Lord succumbs to His devotees. If the 
Lord refused to unbend; if He were to stand tall and declare that He would 
only punish the wrong doers, then the Bhaya* Sampraday would prevail, not 
the Bhakti Sampraday! What would Yamaraj do, if the Lord took over the 
jurisdiction of justice? Yamaraj is assigned to meet out justice. The Lord is 
the one who pardons. The President has the power to pardon - not to give a 
verdict of death by hanging. So, the Lord bows to the desire of His devotees, 
pardons them, shows compassion and Grace. How would anybody feel 
devotion for the Lord, had this not been the case? 

Hence, the Lord allowed Maiya to catch Him. Even so, He showed fear of 
the cane in her hand, and said, "Maiya, throw away your cane first! I feel 
scared of it." Maiya said, "You monkey! You naughty boy! Why did you 
break my dadhiyasaas'* pot?" Shri Krishna said, "Maiya, I'll never do it 
again! Please throw away your cane!" 

See - this is the greatness of a Bhakta! You cannot find a God like this in any 
other religion sect in the world; a God who is frightened, with tears in His 
eyes, and whose tears smear kajal all over His face! The Lord abandons His 



212 



godliness, His magnificence, and becomes an adorable child. It is a vision 
worth seeing, in this episode. 

When Maiya wanted to tie Shri Krishna up, His Yoga Maya would not 
permit Him to be bound. "Can it ever be possible that the advitiya*, asanga*, 
naam-roop-rahit* paripoorna gets bound? Bondage is for that which has a 
form, and a name; has rajoguna and tamoguna." 

However, the Lord is so compassionate that He did not listen to Yoga Maya, 
especially when He saw that each time Maiya attempted to tie Him; the rope 
fell short by two fingers, Maiya was tired out, beads of perspiration were on 
her face, and so He allowed Himself to be tied. The Bhagwat states, with 
absolute clarity, that the Lord bestows Grace when the devotee gives up the 
vanity of thinking that he/she has the capacity to pressurize Him in any way. 

Svamaatuh svinnagaatraayaa vistrastakabarasrajah, 
Drishtvaa parishramam krishnah kripyaaseet svabandhane \ 
10.9.18. 

People ask whether the Lord ties Himself, or whether Maiya tied Him. My 
brother, why should it bother you if He was tied by the hands of His mother? 
The Lord was tied by Maiya, after she was tired out, and perspiring with her 
exertions. *j«=kMHMftsPT: *Ro|%s3i fjqr ^F#g: 
'Bhaktajanaparishramah bhagavannishthaa kripaa cha ubhayame\a 
bandhanahe^tuh ' - what is the reason for the Lord's being tied? One reason 
is that the devotee should realize that it is not by his strength that the Lord is 
tied. The second reason is that compassion arose in the Lord's heart. These 
are the two reasons for the Lord being tied. 

WoKflHlfa fpsfar ^ I I \o.%\%. 

E\am sandarshitaa hyanga harinaa bhrityavashyataa, 

Svavashe ^naapi krishne ^na yasye ^dam se ^shvaram vashe \ 

10.9.19. 

The Lord, who controls Brahma- Vishnu-Mahesh, is showing the people of 
the world: "See for yourselves! I am controlled by My devotees, despite 
being the Parameshwar. My devotee ties Me, and I get bound. 



213 



Ne ^mam virincho na bhavo na shreerapyangasanshrayaa, 
Prasaadam le ^bhire " gopee yattat praapa vimuktidaat. 



10.9.20. 



This compassion and Grace of Mine is not available even to Brahma- 
Shankar-Laxmi, but I bestow it on My devotees. I am, therefore, controlled 
by My Bhaktas, and by Bhakti. I am bound by the hands of My Bhaktas." 
When she had tied Shri Krishna, Maiya was overcome with motherly love. 
"Lala hasn't eaten anything since early morning," she thought. "Let me go 
and prepare butter and roti* for him. Then I can bring it here and feed him." 
She went off to prepare the food. 

Shri Krishna's gaze fell on Yamalarjuna, who had been sons of Kuber, 
called Nalakubar and Manigreeva. They had turned into trees due to a curse 
given by Naradji. So, the Lord said, "It is not Maiya who has tied Me, it is 
Naradji. I have been tied here, so that I can liberate these trees. The words of 
My devotee bind Me - My mother was just the instrument for achieving this 
purpose." 

Give your attention to this Leela of the Lord. What is so great about the fact 
that the Lord uplifts His devotees? What is so surprising about this? Maiya 
tied a rope round the Lord's waist, which was not there previously. A khal - 
in the form of the ukhal - was also bound by this rope. However, when the 
khal went - dragged behind the Lord - in-between the trees, it served to 
liberate them. Under the circumstances, if the Lord, Himself comes into 
someone's heart, what doubt is there, in his being liberated? 
Kuber' s sons, Nalakubar and Manigreeva, had been blinded by the 
intoxication of wealth. They womanized, gambled, and drank heavily. They 
were behaving outrageously, in a state of complete undress, near Shankarji's 
Kailash mountain; Naradji 's heart was filled with compassion, to see them 
thus. He felt that they were both going astray - they should be lead towards 
the right path. With this in mind, Naradji said, "These two should have the 
bodies of trees. They should stay at Gokul until they develop a love for the 
Lord, and attain Him." 

That is why Shri Krishna dragged the ukhal, and came in-between the trees 
called Yamalarjuna. The trees toppled over with a resounding crack. 
However, the sound was arrested - nobody heard it. Two Devtas emerged 
from the trees. They praised the Lord, saying that He was the one in every 
form, and prayed: 




214 



ftuwci Tnoim^j|diuii^ i 

Vaani gunaanukathane " shravanau kathaayaam 
hastee cha karmasu manastava paadayornah, 
Smrityaam shirastava nivaasajagatpranaame " 
Drishtih sataam darshane ^stu bhavattanoonaam. 
10.10.38. 

"Lord, please let our speech be used to describe You. Let us speak - not only 

about You, but also about all the qualities and attributes bound to You - 

including the rope, because we have been liberated because of it." 

The Lord was pleased, and said, "Nalakubar and Manigreeva, please 

understand that Naradji has not cursed you; he has Graced you. I have come 

to you because of his blessing. The vision of a Saint can never result in 

bondage," 

Nalakubar and Manigreeva said, just as photographers say, "Lord, please sit 
on the ukhal, with the rope tied round Your waist. We wish to rest our eyes 
on this beautiful vision, and hold it in our hearts when we leave. O 
Damodar*, the rope of gunas* tied round Your waist is Your instrument for 
liberating people." 

The sound of the falling trees spread over Gokul when Nalakubar and 
Manigreeva had departed. Nandababa and others came running. Nandababa 
saw that Shri Krishna was tied with a rope. "Oh, my Lala is tied," he said, 
untying the rope, and picking Shri Krishna up. 

You see, Maiya tied Shri Krishna, and Nandababa untied Him, liberated 
Him. The fact is that there is neither bondage, nor liberation in the nature of 
the Lord. Bondage and liberation are established through super imposition. 
Nandababa asked Shri Krishna, "Lala, who tied you up?" Shri Krishna had, 
at that moment, climbed onto Nandababa' s shoulders, and was playing with 
his beard. Nandababa was dancing. Shri Krishna put His face close to 
Baba's ear, and whispered, "Baba, Maiya tied Me." Nandababa said, "Oh, 
Maiya tied you, did she? Now don't go near her at all." "Yes, Baba, I'll 
never go near her again," said Shri Krishna. 

Just then, He saw Maiya. He jumped down from Nandababa' s shoulder, 
clambered onto her lap, and began to suckle. An ambience of joy prevailed. 
We rest here, for today, and discuss the next episode tomorrow. 

Om Shantih! Shantih! Shantih! 



215 



Bhagwatamrit 
Pravarchan X 
Skandha X 



Each Leela of the Lord serves several purposes, carries different messages. One of the 
points about the Ukhal Bandhan Leela, discussed yesterday, was the fact that when 
kama, krodha, and lobha enter the life of a person - even in the case of powerful 
demigods like Brahmaji, or the Lord Himself - they, too, are forced to accept fear and 
bondage. 

The second point is that the Lord voluntarily accepts kama, krodha, and lobha, etc, to 
Grace His devotees. He allows Himself to be bound, in order to liberate others. 
Nalakubar and Manigreeva were not the only ones liberated by the Lord. Even those 
who read, listen to, and speak of the Leela, are liberated. 

The third point is that just the blessings, Grace, or boon of a Mahapurush is enough to 
enable us to bind the Lord. Nanda-Yahsoda got this Grace through the blessings of 
Prajapati. 

The fourth point is that the saguna Lord acquires His own attributes. Guna means 
rope, bondage. The nirguna may be free of bondage, and do nothing to actively attract 
people, but the saguna Lord not only ties His devotees to Himself, He allows them to 
tie Him, through His gunas. This bondage grants the supreme bliss. 
The fifth point is that there is neither bondage, nor liberation, in the Lord. The gunas 
can never touch Him. He was tied when Yashoda Maiya super imposed the gunas - 
the bondage - and became free when Nandababa negated the super imposed bonds. 
The Lord's natural state of being the supreme Almighty is self-established. 
The Ukhal Bandhan Leela is predominantly a Leela of compassion. This becomes 
clear when we give it some thought. The fact is that just as there is no indication of 
You - w-'q^T^TT^ 'tvam padalakshyartha ' - in the same way, the Lord accepts the 
good and the bad tendencies which come into our lives, and the jeeva accepts the 
special qualities of the Lord. Unless this was the case, it would be impossible to 
establish the relationship of friendship - M 'sakhaa ' - between the jeeva and the 
Ishwara. How is it possible that the jeev lies in bondage, and his sakhaa - Ishwar - sits 
aloof? So the Lord showed us, "Jeeva, you and I are friends, on an equal status. Just as 
I am free, in spite of feeling fear, running away, and being bound - in the same way, 
you, too, are free, in spite of feeling fear, trying to escape, or getting tied down." 
Now, let us proceed to the porch of Nanda- Yashoda, in Gokul. See what is going on 
there - 



216 



<tNt pF?RT ^TO^FHTfofH yl^H^H^' 
^^-4iru|dMVd<rddo|di|telHH^M<NH 

Dorbhyaam dorbhyaam vrajantam vrajasadannjanaahvaana prollasantam 
Mandam mandam hasantam madhumadhuravacho me 7z bruyantam, 
Gopaalee-paanitaalee-taralitavalayahvaanamugdhaantaraacham 
Vnade " tarn de \amindeevaradalavimalashyaamalam nandabaalam. 

A little blue-hued boy, covered with dust, is dancing to the rhythm of the Gopis' 
clapping. The Gopis say, "Dance, Lala, dance! I will give you a lump of butter." 
Hearing this, the child dances with greater zest. Seeing this, one Gopi told her friend: 

^ffaf^l^ftdl^ll ^rfrT ^Kl-dft-KI-d: I I 

Shrunu sakhi kautukame^kam nandanike^taangane^ mayaa drishtam, 
Godhoolidhoosaritaango nrityati ve ^dantasiddhantah. 

"My friends, He is just a child. Furthermore, He is covered with dust. He is dancing at 
the bidding of the Gopis. However, do you know who He really is? He is the 
personified principal of the Vedas." 

Now, see - when you can accept that the Shaligram Shila* is Vishnu, why should you 
feel hesitant to accept this child as the Brahman? Just believe that the child you see is 
Brahman, and see how happy you feel! 

The jeeva tried to find the Brahman on the branches of the tree of the Vedas, but 
failed. And - where did he find Him? At the corner of the Gopis' saris. 

cRrHHJ^IHlfciltei ft'lH^ iHdl^HKfislsll: I 

Varamimamupade ^shamaadriyadhvam nigamavane ^shu 
nitaantachaarakhinnah, 

Vichinuta bhavane ^shu vallabheenaamupanishadarhtamulookhale " 
nibaddham. 

The poet who wrote 'Krishna Karnamrit' says, "Don't seek the principal of the Vedas 
in the forest of the scriptures. Seek Him in the cowsheds of the Gopis - Look! He is 
there, tied to the Ukhal." 

So, the meaning of the Upanishads was tied to the Ukhal! A rope was tied to His 
waist, and the Ukhal, tied to the rope, attained the power to turn two trees into Devtas. 



217 



The sweetness of the Lord is such that once we begin to relish it, there is no need to 
strive for detachment. As soon as we get attached to the Lord, we begin to get 
detached from everything else. That is why one poet Saint has said, 

^fT Tft% TFT eTFT# TTf^ I 

rft iSfZ^T ^^R^T 3TT> ft ^ ^ ^ I 

Jo mohi mam laagate " meethe \ 

To anarasa shatarasa navarasa am hvaijaate " saba seethe \ 

So, this child is dancing! Yashoda Maiya says, "Lala, stop dancing now. Pick up the 
weighing stone, and come in." The child rushes to pick up the vaat, but is unable to do 
so. Then he lies down, and tries to push it with his chest. His face turns red with his 
exertions. Yashoda Maiya says, "If you can't lift the path, let it be," and gives him a 
hug. 

Nandababa comes just then, and says, "Lala, bring my khadau*." The child runs and 
fetches the wooden slippers. Nandababa lifts him onto his lap, kisses him, and 
showers affection on him. 

This Leela of the baal Gopal* is going on in the house of Nanda- Yashoda. How can 
the jeeva be controlled by the Lord, unless He allows Himself to be controlled by the 
jeeva? This is not a one-sided love - it is reciprocal. The Lord is not pleased with any 
one-sided love; He wants it to be reciprocated. It is the specialty of Vrindavan that the 
love here is always reciprocal. 

There is so much love in Vrindavan, that when the trees crashed down, all the 
cowherds gathered, and said, "Nandababa, too many accidents are occurring in Gokul. 
Putana took our Lala off, and began to feed him poison. By the Grace of God, it was 
she who died. The cart toppled over our Lala, and luckily he was saved again. After 
that, he was saved even after the tornado carried him off. Now, these old trees have 
toppled over, and our Lala is saved once more. There is no doubt that we are protected 
by the blessings and Grace of Mahapurushas, and God. However, the plants and trees 
here are very old. There are also too many wild creatures who may harm our children. 
So, let us leave this village, and move to Vrindavan." 

Just think of it! The entire village leaves their homes and fields, and moves to 
Vrindavan with their movable possessions - for the sake of one child! Is it not quite 
extraordinary? 

When all the Gopa-Gopis*, and gwaal baals settled in Vrindavan, Shri Krishna danced 
with joy, to see how beautiful the place had become. A love for Vrindavan, for the 
Govardhan*, and the banks of the Yamuna arose in His heart. 

Vrindavanam govardhanam yamunaapulinaani cha, 



218 



Veekshyaaseeduttamaa preetee raamamaadhavayornripa. 
10.11.36. 

Shri Krishna said, "I will go to the woods with the calves, when they are taken for 
grazing." He was old enough to do so, and so people had to accept His wishes. 
You see, we should not reject every suggestion made by the youngsters. We should 
never say, "You are foolish. We cannot let you do what you want." The older 
generation lives in an older style, and the younger generation has a modern lifestyle. A 
gap of twenty or twenty five years exists between them. The youngsters should be 
allowed to develop according to their times. 

So, Shri Krishna started to accompany the other gwaal baals, when they took the 
calves out to graze. One day, they met Vatsasura. This demon symbolizes mamatva*. 
He thought that these people are very attached, and partial to their calves. 
It is difficult to recognize the faults in those we are attached to. We fail to see the 
good in those we dislike, and fail to see the faults in those we are fond of. Whereas 
everybody has good and bad qualities, people are blinded by raga-dvesh*. 
Vatsasura took on the form of a calf, and mingled with the calves of Shri Krishna. He 
thought that the Lord's affection for the calves would save him from being recognized 
for what he was. 

However, who can escape the discriminating visions of Shri Krishna? He recognized 
Vatsasura, and said to Balaramji, "See, Dau dada, a beautiful new calf has joined our 
calves." Pointing out the new calf, He came close to it. Catching both the hind feet 
and the tail, the Lord lifted it up, and whirled it over His head, and dashed it against a 
tree. The demon could sustain his calf form no more, and returned to his original form 
of a demon. The gwaal baals saw him, and said, "Oh, God! This was a demon!" They 
hugged Shri Krishna with joy, and danced with glee, singing, "The demon is dead! 
The demon is dead!" 

The following day, Shri Krishna went with His friends and the calves, near a little lake 
created by the waters of the Yamuna. They saw a stork standing in the lake. All of you 
know what a hypocrite this bird is. It is difficult to find any other bird as hypocritical 
as the stork. He stands on one foot, as though practicing asceticism, but gobbles up 
every fish he sees. 

The gwaal baals saw how beautiful this pure white stork was. They saw him stand on 
one foot, utterly silent. However, as soon as Shri Krishna went near him, he pounced 
on the Lord, and swallowed Him. This was a mistake. His mouth began to burn, 
because he had swallowed the Lord. Shri Krishna's name is to be kept in the mouth, 
not His form! Bakasura*'s action was at variance to what is proper. This made him 
Krishnavartma*, and his mouth caught fire. He spat Shri Krishna out. As soon as He 
emerged, Shri Krishna caught the upper and lower beaks of the stork in His two 
hands, tore the demon into two, and threw him away. 



219 



The Devtas began to shower flowers upon Shri Krishna, when they saw that He had 

killed hypocrisy (which had come in the form of Bakasura). They knew that earlier, 

the Lord had destroyed nescience, personified as Putana, and also the hurricane, which 

was personified desire. The Devtas became worshippers of Shri Krishna. 

On one occasion, Balaramji stayed at home, because it was the day of his astrological 

birth sign. Shri Krishna went with the other youngsters, to a nearby wood, to graze the 

calves. 

The gwaal baals began to play with Shri Krishna. For a while, they forgot that He was 
the Lord. 

The success of acting a role - of drama - lies in those watching, forgetting reality, and 
losing themselves in the play. Shri Krishna played like an ordinary child. Shri 
Shukadevji Maharaj told Parikshit, "The same Lord - the dust of whose feet cannot be 
obtained even by several births of intense asceticism - is playing joyfully with the 
gwaal baals - 

Yatpaadapaansurbahujanmakricchrito dritaatmabhiryogibhirapyalamyah, 

Sa e \a yaddrigvishayah svayam sthitah kim varnyate " ishtamato vrajaukasaam. 

10.12.12. 

Now a demon called Aghasura* came, while Shri Krishna played with the children. 
Agha means sin, and can not be destroyed until it has meted out its fruit - H 
feRT ^fcT 3T£T: l na hanyate^ bhogam vinaa iti aghah'. You can refuse a prize, but you 
cannot refuse a penalty. The fruits of merit can be avoided. They can be offered to 
another. You can not, however, avoid the consequences of your sins; and that is why it 
is called 'agha'. There is no way to save ourselves form it - it must be gone through. 
Aghasura was the brother of Nescience - Putana, and of Hypocrisy - Bakasura. He 
had, moreover, been sent by Kansa. So, he could not bear to see the gwaal baals 
happy. He opened his mouth wide. The gwaal baals did not know who he was, 
because how can anybody, who has never encountered sin, know what it is? Hence, 
the gwaal baals felt that this must be a part of the natural beauty of Vrindavan. They 
casually strolled in, along with the calves, right into Aghasura' s mouth. Aghasura was 
just waiting for Shri Krishna to also enter, before he closed his mouth. 
Shri Krishna thought, "I am where My Bhaktas are." Actually, the Lord does not have 
a house of His own. He abides in the heart of every creature, as He has stated in the 
Gita. 



220 



Ishvarah sarvabhootaanaam hridde ^she yjuna tishthati. 

So, the Lord is where His devotees are. If a devotee once enters the mouth of Agha, 
sin, or jealousy, he can not save himself. It is the Lord who saves him. Had it been the 
nirguna Lord, He would merely have watched all that happened, and said, "Nothing 
exists, apart from My essence." 

However, this is the saguna Lord, who said, "I will definitely go wherever My 
devotees go." This is the God-like quality of the Lord. He purifies the sullied, carries 
forward those who are left behind, and raises up the lowly. It is His vow - 

^TT^cT ^?T^T: fcMoifadl % W. 1 1 

Api che ^tsuduraachaaro bhajate " maam ananyabhak, 
Saadhuriva sa mantavyah samyak vyavasito hi sah. 
Kshipram bhavati dharmaatmaa shashvatshaantim nigacchati, 
Kaunteya pratijaaneehi na me' bhakta pranashyati. 
Gita. 

So, the Lord entered the mouth of Aghasura. The demon was waiting for this, and 
promptly closed his mouth. The Lord said, "Son, you have sealed My exit, but I will 
go out from your doorway." The Brahmarandhra* of Aghasura burst open. Shri 
Krishna came out, along with the gwaal baals and the calves. Jut then, a bright glow 
emerged form Aghasura, and merged into the form of Shri Krishna. 
There is nothing to wonder at, in this, The Atma of Agha, is also the Paramatma. Both 
are of the same essence. Merit and demerit exist in the same sub-stratum, get 
illumined, and are pervaded by the Atman (the bliss). 

When the glow which emerged from Aghasura merged into Shri Krishna, a 
celebration took place at Devloka. At that time, Brahmaji was busy giving appropriate 
bodies to the jeevas. One must keep in mind that Brahmaji does not create the basic 
matter - he merely assembles the parts. This is his factory, because the basic matter - 
Prakriti - already exists, and so does karma. Brahmaji merely assembles these factors 
and makes the form. 

Hearing sounds of celebration, Brahmaji came out and began to wonder where the 
celebration was being held. He realized that it was not being held at his doorstep. Nor 
was it being held in Heaven - it was being held on Earth, and that too, in the 
Vrajabhoomi*. Brahmaji went there immediately. He saw, and understood, all that 
had happened. He was shocked to think that Aghasura had been liberated. "Our 



221 



Vedas, Puranas, and Shastras have no mention of the liberation of sin! Sin can be 
liberated only in the non-dual Paramatma, so it does not come within the jurisdiction 
of rituals and strictures. What is it, then? It is the Leela of the Paramatma, who is 
beyond all rules and norms! Brahmaji said, "Come, let us see some more of His Leela, 
because it is so difficult to believe that such a Leela is possible." 
The Leela seen by Brahmaji, when he came to Vrindavan, was quite extraordinary. It 
was also beyond the jurisdiction of the scriptural laws. After coming out of 
Aghasura's mouth, the gwaal baals, and calves, and Shri Krishna, went to the banks of 
the Yamuna. They opened their food hampers, which had been poisoned when carried 
into Aghasura's mouth, took out the food, and sat down together to eat it. Shri Krishna 
sat in the center, and the gwaal baals sat around Him in circles. 

This is the Leela of the Sakhya Rasa*. Just as the Raas Leela with the Gopis belongs 
to the Madhur Rasa*, and contains dancing, singing, music, and drama, in the same 
way, this Leela contains a meal with friends. The Lord is having a picnic with His 
friends. Seeing the scene, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj says: 

Vibhradve ^num jatharapatayoh shringave ^tre " cha kakshe " 
Vaame^ paanau masrinakavalam tatfalaanyanguleeshu, 
Tishthanmadhye^svaparisuhrido haasayan narmabhih svaih 
Svarge " loke " mishati bubhuje " yagyabhugvaalake lih. 
10.13.11. 

"My brother, how wonderful it is, that the Lord - who does not appear to partake of 
the offering, after the chanting of great mantras spoken in Yagyas - is sitting with 
these simple cowherd boys, and having a meal with them! He does not even have a 
plate - leaf, or metal. Every boy present feels that Shri Krishna is seated directly 
opposite him. The Lord holds curd-rice on the palm of His left hand, and eats with His 
right hand. His flute is tucked in the garment tied at His waist." 

This is why the Mahatmas taunt the Lord, by saying, "You play in the dust of the 
courtyards of these cowherds, but are shy of coming to the Yagyas of the Brahmins? 
When the cows moo and burp, You talk to them, but You do not care to speak the 
mantras of the Vedas! You walk behind these rustic Gopis, but feel shy to come 
before the Mahatmas! Oh, Lord, we understand. You are not bound by any laws of 
creation. You submit to love. It is only by love that You are attained." 



222 



The Love of the cowherd boys is so extraordinary that they never even realize His 
divine powers. Whenever they encounter danger, they merely say, "Kanhaiya* is 
stronger than we are - call him to come and save us." 

Thus, the love of all the Gopis, Gopas*, and gwaal baals, is beyond description. They 
are all immersed in thoughts and memories about Him. 

Brahmaji was amazed to see all this. He marveled at the extraordinary ground of 
Vraja. Then he noticed that Shri Krishna was eating a meal with His friends, and 
deriving great pleasure. He was not at all bothered about the contamination of 
disregarding the factors of caste, or eating from another's plate. Brahmaji was 
troubled, because this was against the strictures of the Vedas. 

While such thoughts flitted through the mind of Brahmaji, the calves were lured 
towards tender grass - ^MlfacTT ' trinalobhitaa '. They wandered into the forest. The 
attention of the gwaal baals shifted from Shri Krishna to their wandering calves. 
Attachment for their calves filled their hearts, and they began to worry about bringing 
their calves back. Seeing this, it was as though Shri Krishna said, "Wait, wait! I sit 
before you, and you look at the calves, instead of looking at Me!" 
You will see this phenomenon all through the Shrimad Bhagwat. Trouble comes, 
whenever attention is shifted away from Shri Krishna. Putana lifted up Shri Krishna 
when Yashoda Maiya began to look at her, instead of the Lord. The cart toppled over 
when Maiya got busy with her guests. The hurricane lifted up Shri Krishna, and 
carried Him away, when she got engrossed with household chores. The trees toppled 
over when Maiya went indoors, after tying Shri Krishna to the Ukhal. 
The same thing happened here. When the gwaal baals started to look for their calves, 
Shri Krishna told them to finish their meal. "I will bring the calves back," He said. 
But, where were the calves? Brahmaji had kidnapped them. He also kidnapped the 
cowherd boys, when Shri Krishna went off to look for the calves. He imprisoned the 
boys and their calves in the cave of suspended animation. From the angle of Bhakti, 
Samadhi is a cave. We will discuss this later. 

When Shri Krishna realized that neither the calves, nor His friends were to be found, 
He understood what had happened. "So, this is Brahmaji's doing. He wishes to see 
MyLeela!" 

But, which Leela should Brahmaji be shown? What is the use of showing off one's 
knowledge of the Vedas to a scholar of Grammar, or vice versa? It is proper to display 
one's skills in the field of the other's specialty. 

The Lord said, "Brahmaji, you are skilled at making creatures. You assemble the 
parts, and make beautiful bodies. But - see, today I will create a world. My Creation 
does not have a jeeva with a previous birth; nor is there an antahkaran. There is no 
stuff for Me to mould. I will, Myself, turn into many." 



223 



The Lord's ability is wonderful. He has no matter to mould, no wall to rest against, no 
foundation to build upon, no physical body, no pen, no cotton, no color - and yet, He 
creates the picture. He alone takes on many forms. 

TTcfTsiT qcrfw, Ipn ^rfrT, fen srafw, 

WTT *[crirT, Wm\ ^forfrT, 3}^P1T mfc I 

Sa e ^kadhaa bhavati, dvidhaa bhavati, tridhaa bhavati, 
Panchadhaa bhavati, saptadhaa bhavati, one ^kadhaa bhavati. 

This is why Goswami Tulsidas said: 

Shoonya bheetipara chitra rang nahi tanu binu likhaa chite >e \ 

So, the Lord Shri Krishna created, merely by deciding to do so, such a new world - 
which prevailed for one full year! Seeing this unique creation, Balaramji did become 
suspicious. The Lord told him briefly, about what had happened. Balaramji is the 
Lord's friend, as well as His seat. He is also Prakriti, and the principal. So, the Lord 
felt that it was proper to share the secret with him. 

When Brahmaji took the spirit of the calves and gwaal baals to his land, he found that 
another Brahmaji had come and established himself there. The gate keeper insulted 
him, refusing to let him enter. He returned to Vraja, only to see the gwaal baals and 
calves lying unconscious, just as he had left them. However, identical youngsters and 
calves were playing, where they normally played. Brahmaji was quite astonished to 
see this. At once, all the youngsters and calves took on the form of Shri Krishna. 
Brahmaji became pale, and stood stupefied, like a dumb puppet. 

lfot^S?re# iH^H^HfH WHfaid4> 

Iteere ^she ^atarkye " nijamahimani svapramitike " 
Paratraajaatoatannirasanamukhabrahmakamitau, 
Aneeshe^api drashtum kimidamiti vaa muhyati sati 
Chacchaadaajo gyaatvaa sapadi paramoajaajavanikaam. 
10.13.57. 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj says, "Parikshit, Brahmaji possesses the knowledge of all the 
skills, but he failed absolutely in understanding the Lord's divine Leela. He was so 



224 



confused that he became incapable of even looking at all these forms assumed by the 
Lord. His eyes were dazzled by seeing the Lord's multiple forms. When the Lord 
observed Brahmaji's condition, He immediately withdrew the curtain of Maya. 
Brahmaji then came to his senses. He had the vision of the Lord. He jumped down 
from the swan, which is his usual mount, and started to roll at the feet of the Lord. He 
eulogized the Lord. 

Please note that the indication of this episode is that the Lord is non-dual. Prakriti is 
also the name of the Paramatma. Nothing exists, except the Paramatma. Brahmaji had 
the experience of this principle of Advait*. He thought that discrimination is of no 
use, now. It is the Brahman, which is Knowledge incarnate, which is needed. Vivek* 
is used only to separate, for the purpose of discriminating between two or more 
objects; whereas gnan unifies. So, Brahmaji prayed: 

Naumeedya te ^bhravapushe " tadidambaraaya 
Gunjaavatansha-paripicchalasanmukhaaya, 
Vanyasraje " kavalave ^tra vishaanave % nu 
Lakshmashriye " mridupade^ pashupangajaaya. 
10.14.1. 

"Lord, I know neither the Nirguna, nor the Saguna. My all-in-all stands before me - 
with a handful of curds and rice, with a flute tucked into His waist band, wearing a 
golden garment, in the form of this blue-hued Nanda Nandan. I know nothing except 
Him, so I bow to You." 

Eulogizing the Lord in this manner, Brahmaji said that this whole world is a 
conviction caused by not knowing the Paramatma. It is ignorance which deludes us 
into believing that the world is real. This false understanding dissolves as soon as we 
obtain the ultimate Gnan. The nature of the Lord has neither bondage, nor liberation - 
just as day and night do not exist for the Sun. The Sun never sees night or day. 

wet *rctsfa ddidkcl T^F#^momicfr m\ 1 1 

Aatmaaname \aatmatayaavijaanataam te ^naiva jaatam nikhilam prapanchitam, 
Gnaane^na bhooyoapi cha tatpraleeyate^ rajjvaamaheVbhogabhavaabhavau yathaa. 



225 



Agnaanasamgnau bhavabandhamokshau dvau naama naanyau sta ritagnabhaavaat, 
Ajasrachintyaatmani ke\ale* pare^ vichaaryamaane^ taranaavivaahani. 
10.14.25-26. 

Brahmaji further said, "Lord, I desire only Your Grace. I want neither liberation, nor 
birth. Make me some object in Vraja." 

Then, as though the Lord asked, "What should I make you, Brahmaji? Should I make 
you Brahma again?" 

Brahmaji said, "No, Sir, I have no wish to be Brahma. Make me anything in Vraja." 
The Lord asked, "All right, but what in Vraja - a cow, a calf, or a cowherd boy?" 
Brahmaji said, "No, no, Sir! I have wronged them. Don't make me any of these. Make 
me some object, on which the dust of their feet may fall." 

After the Lord bid farewell to Brahmaji, He came to the bank of the Yamuna, where 
He had left the cowherd boys. Brahmaji had already arranged for them to be returned 
to the spot from where he had kidnapped them. When the youngsters saw Shri 
Krishna, they heaved a sigh of relief. "Thank God you have come, Kanhaiya!" they 
said. "You are most welcome! See - we did not eat a single mouthful after you left us 
to bring the calves back." The Lord smiled to Himself, and sat down to enjoy a meal 
with His friends. 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj clarified to Parikshit, that even though a full year had 
elapsed between the time Shri Krishna left the gwaal baals, and returned, His Maya 
ensured that they felt that He had been away for just a moment. 

Rama and Krishna were now old enough to take the cows out to graze. Both brothers 
would go into the forest with their friends. They would derive immense pleasure to 
see the natural beauty. 

Now, when you think about Shri Krishna's go-charan*, think of who your go-charan 
is. Gokul does not mean just a particular village. It also means a group of senses - W 
ifoT I ft^FT 'gavaama kulam gokulam '. It is with you, too. Your ears are the cows, and 
your eyes and nose are cows, too. All of your senses feed on objects, so it is essential 
for you to pay attention as to who the cowherd is. Just think - is Kama the cowherd? 
Are your senses driven by desire, or are they driven by the Parameshwar who abides 
in your heart? Your senses will be controlled properly when you focus on who they 
are lead by. 

This is what was happening in Vrindavan. The Lord incarnate is the one who is 
controlling the senses of the people. It is neither desire, nor the one who desires, and 
nor the jeeva either. The Lord has made Himself an ordinary person here. From 
Nirakar, He became Sakar. He came from Vaikuntha to Vrindavan, and presented 
Himself before our senses. This is because the Lord can give salvation to us only 
where we reside. We have no capacity to go where He is. How can the jeeva and the 
Ishwara ever meet, unless He came to us? 



226 



If you ask, "How does the Lord come?" The answer is that just as the vaachyartha* 
jeeva comes and goes, so does the Lord. The only difference is that the jeeva comes 
and goes as a result of Avidya, whereas the Lord comes and goes using His Maya. 
So, one day, when the Lord went to the forest to graze the cows, He saw the natural 
beauty, and told His brother, "Dau Dada, the great Devtas worship you. But see - 
these trees bend towards you, laden with fruit. They are bowing down to you. Just see 
- the wild peacocks, deer, and cuckoos, are so happy to see you! Even the tender grass 
is thrilled to get the touch of your feet. Actually, the entire forest serves you, with all 
its wealth and beauty." 

Rama-Krishna were wandering around, discussing how lovely the woods were, when 
a friend called Shridama* said, "Close by, there is a large wood of Palmyra trees. The 
fruits are sweet and ripe. The over-ripe ones are falling down. A wicked demon called 
Dhenuka lives there, and won't allow anyone to eat the fruits. We are all very keen to 
eat these sweet fruits." 

Rama-Krishna laughed to hear these words. They accompanied their friends into the 
Palmyra grove. Balaramji shook the trees with his strong hands, causing hundreds of 
ripe fruits to fall. Everybody ate them with relish. 

Just then, Dhenukasura*, who lived there, in the form of a donkey, came running and 
attacked Balaramji. Even though the demon was exceptionally strong, Balaramji lifted 
him easily, by both his hind legs. He whirled the demon around, and dashed him so 
hard, that he died. 

Shri Vallabhacharyaji Maharaj has said that Dhenukasura is the personification of the 
dehadhyas* - ^T^rrat % 'de^haadhyaaso hi dhe^nukah. ' According to him, the 
feeling that we are the body, is called 'dhe nuk', and the 'taal', 'taad', or 'taar' (the 
Palmyra) is the Omkar. Our identification with our body is the barrier in our tasting 
the supreme fruit. So, Balaramji went along with Shri Krishna, and destroyed the 
demon Dhenukasura. 

The episode, of Kaliya Daha*, comes next. The word 'dahar' is used in the 
Upanishads. 'Dahar' became 'hrad', and 'hrad' turned into 'daha' in Hindi. 
One day, Balaramji stayed at home, and Shri Krishna went with the cows and the 
cowherd boys, to a particular spot on the bank of the Yamuna. A serpent called Kaliya 
lived in the Yamuna at that spot, and his venom had poisoned the water there. Due to 
the intensely warm weather, the cows and the youths were all very thirsty. They 
ignored the danger, drinking deeply to quench their thirst. The poison was so strong 
that they died on the spot. However, Shri Krishna revived them all, showering them 
with the elixir just by His divine look. 

Shri Krishna then decided that since Yamunaji - the daughter of the Sun - was His 
sweetheart, His darling, and was later on to become His fourth principal Queen at 
Dwarka, He would throw out the Kaliya nag* from inside her waters. 



227 



Shri Vallabhacharyaji Maharaj says that our senses are like the Kaliya nag, and when 
we indulge indiscriminately with the 'vishayas'*, it is like imbuing 'vish' (poison). 
So, the Lord Shri Krishna jumped into the waters of the Yamuna, with the purpose of 
purifying the sense organs of His devotees, absorbing the poison as Shankarji had 
done, and removing the Kaliya nag from there. 

Kaliya nag was fast asleep. His wives - the nagins* - saw Shri Krishna, and asked, 
"How did you come here? Go away quickly! Our husband is extremely venomous!" 
Shri Krishna said, "Let him be as venomous as he wants," and kicked the sleeping 
serpent, calling out a challenge. The serpent woke up hissing with anger. When his 
eyes fell on Shri Krishna, however, he was enchanted. "I have never before, in my 
life, forgiven anyone," he told the Lord. "However, I am bewitched by your beauty. 
So - if you desire your own good, leave me quickly." 

Shri Krishna said, "Oh, Kaliya - 1 did not come here to simply turn back! The purpose 
of My coming here is to make you go away. If you agree, you can leave this river 
immediately. If not, we will fight it out." 

Shri Krishna and Kaliya nag then began to wrestle. Kaliya caught Shri Krishna tightly 
in his coils, and gave Him such a bite, that for a moment, the Lord became immobile. 
All the people in Vraja were horrified to see this. They began to weep and lament. 
Balaramji, however, knew the power of the Lord. He managed to convince everybody 
that there was no cause for fear. 

When Shri Krishna saw how tense everyone had become, He inflated His body, and 
freed Himself from the serpent's coils. This angered Kaliya even more, and he hissed 
with renewed anger. Shri Krishna jumped onto the head of this hundred-headed 
serpent, and began to perform the Tandav Nritya (divine dance). The Gandharvas, 
Apsaras, and other great Devtas - including Brahma and Shankar - came to see the 
Lord's Tandav Nritya. Shri Shukadevji Maharaj describes it: 

df^dl"rfl*>JU|4>u|ldM=ll 

HKN"i wwn w\w 1 1 

Tachchitrataandavavirugnafanaatapatro 
Raktam mukhairuru vaman nripa bhagnajatrah, 
Smritvaa charaacharagurum purusham puraanam 
Naaraayanam tamaranam manasaa jagaama. 
10. 16. 30. 

"Parikshit, the Lord danced such a tandav on the heads of Kaliya nag, that His feet 
tore the serpent's hoods to shreds. The serpent's body was crushed. He began to vomit 
blood. Then he thought of God, and mentally surrendered to Him. 



228 



Seeing this, the wives of Kaliya nag began to eulogize the Lord. It was an amazing 
stuti. They said, "Lord, You have punished our husband - this is not Your justice, it is 
Your Grace! Because, even great ascetics are unable to obtain the touch of Your feet. 
Our husband is guilty. We have no idea as to what austerities he may have performed 
in the past, to obtain Your Grace in this way." 

The Lord was pleased, and jumped down from Kaliya' s head. The serpent regained 

consciousness, and said, "Shri Krishna, whether You control me, or Grace me; 

whether You punish me, or show mercy - I will say what is in my mind. Please tell 

me, is it not You, who created the world?" 

"Yes," replied the Lord, "I have created the world." 

"Is it not You, who became the world?" 

"It is I who have become the world." 

"Are You not its abhinnanimittopaadan karana (material and instrumental cause)?" 
"Yes, certainly I am." 

"All that is in this world - the jaati*, aakriti*, svabhaav*, all the good and the bad 
tendencies, all the strength, ability and power - is it not all created by You?" 
"Yes, it is." 

"Is it not You, who made me a serpent?" 
"It is, indeed, I who made you a serpent." 
"Is it not You, who put venom in my tooth?" 
"It is." 

"Then, what is new, about what I do? If it pleases You, then uplift me; or leave me, 
but You have to admit that You are responsible for all that has happened here." 
This argument left Shri Krishna with nothing more to say. He said, "You came to this 
spot, because you feared Garudaji. However, I now plan to frolic here, so it is not 
suitable for you to remain here. I have placed My foot on your head. As a result, you 
are now liberated. You need fear Garudaji no more and can safely return to your 
original home." 

Look, even the snake is a creature of the Kingdom of the Lord. Hence, even snakes 
have their uses, and deserve a place to live, and food to eat. 

Answering Parikshit's question as to the cause of the quarrel between the Garuda and 
Kaliya nag, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj said, "Kaliya nag had, on one occasion, refused 
to give his portion of the routine sacrifice given to Garuda. So, Garudaji was annoyed 
with him. At first, Kaliya nag fought with Garudaji, but when he lost, he went and hid 
in the Yamuna. 

Garudaji did not come to the Kaliya daha, because Saubhari Rishi had cursed 
Garudaji, saying that he would die if he came to this spot. It was most inappropriate of 
Saubhari Rishi to curse the mount of the Lord in this way. As a result, he got 
entangled in sensual pleasures. And, although Garudaji didn't come to the Kaliya 
daha, the Lord came, and purified the spot. 



229 



When Shri Krishna emerged from the water, after subduing Kaliya, He was embraced 
lovingly by all the people. Nandababa gave lots of offerings to the Brahmins. Yashoda 
Maiya looked as though life had been restored to her. 

By then, the sun had set. Everyone was mentally and physically exhausted. They all 
lay down on the bank of the Yamuna, and went to sleep. All of a sudden, the whole 
place burst into flames at midnight, and the Vrajvasis* were trapped in between. They 
cried out to Rama-Krishna, to save them. Seeing His people in trouble, Shri Krishna 
consumed the fire. 

You see, the fire was Devagni - a divine fire. It consumed all the poisoned items, to 
ensure that there would be no risk of hungry people, or cattle, consuming a poisoned 
item. Agni* arises from the mouth of the Lord, and merges in His mouth. That is why 
the Lord took fire into His mouth. 

Balaramji's killing Pralambasura* is described next. Pralamba was a particularly 
frightening demon. He wanted to kidnap both Rama and Krishna, but realized that it 
was beyond his power to kidnap Shri Krishna. He decided to kidnap Balaramji. 
Shri Krishna recognized Pralambasura, and was thinking of the best way to deal with 
him. He made a plan, and told the gwaal baals to split up into two teams, and play 
some games. Balaramji became the leader of one team, and Shri Krishna became the 
leader of the other team. 

Pralamba took on the form of a cowherd boy, and mingled with the boys in Shri 
Krishna's team. The rules of the play were that the losing team would carry the 
members of the winning team on their shoulders. So, when Balaramji's team won, 
Shri Krishna took Shridama on His shoulders, and Pralamba took Balaramji. 
This was the moment Pralamba was waiting for. He started to run off with Balaramji, 
returning to his original form after a while. Balaramji understood the demon's 
intention. He punched Pralambasura' s head so hard, that it was smashed, and the 
demon fell down dead. The gwaal baals were shocked to see this. They showered 
Balaramji with good wishes. 

The next episode is that of Shri Krishna saving the gwaal baals and calves from the 
forest fire. While eating the lush grass, the cows had wandered deep into a thick 
forest. Shri Krishna, Balaramji, and the gwaal baals did not realize where the cows 
had gone. They followed the marks of the hooves, and saw that the cows were trapped 
between clumps of tall grass. They were lowing in fear. Shri Krishna called out their 
names lovingly, and they came rushing joyfully to Him. 

A forest fire started all of a sudden, with a strong breeze fanning the flames. Not only 
the cows, even the cowherd boys were in peril. Terrified, they called out to Balaramji 
and Shri Krishna to save them. Shri Krishna said," Do not fear. Just close your eyes." 
Everyone closed their eyes. Shri Krishna used His yogic power to drink up the fire. 
This fire was the asura agni*. Shri Krishna consumed it, however, because the karya* 
always dissolves into the karan*. 



230 



The gwaal baals and cows returned to Vraja in the evening, with Shri Krishna and 
Balaramji following. The youngsters were singing the praises of the two brothers. 
When they reached Vraja, Nandababa, Yashoda Maiya, and all the others experienced 
a divine ecstasy at the sight of Shri Krishna. 

The adhyatmik angle of this episode should be understood. Certain demons are 
destroyed by Balaramji, and certain by Shri Krishna. So, when a person undertakes a 
sadhana, he needs to have both atma-bal* and tattva-gnan*. A knowledgeable person 
who is weak minded is unable to overcome his faults, even though the tattva-gnan is 
complete in itself. Tattva-gnan is not the result of any karma, and nor does it give rise 
to any karma. However, during the period of spiritual effort, a person needs strength 
of mind to develop the qualities of shama-dama* - HWHicHi sfcH^H ^r«T: H H ^pn 
ar^T 'naayamaatmaa balaheene ^na labhyah na me ^dhayaa na bahunaa shrute ^na. ' A 
certain strength - derived by rigorous practice - is necessary for removing dehadhyas. 
Tattva-gnan is separate from both of 
them. 

Descriptions of the rains, and autumn, follow this episode. The description in the 
Bhagwat is similar to the description in the Kishkindha Kand of Tulsidasji's 
Ramayana. These are descriptions of exceptional beauty, with great spiritual 
significance. 

The Shrimad Bhagwat states that the beauty of Vrindavan was greatly enhanced in 
autumn. Shri Krishna began to play the flute when He went to graze the cows. Not 
only the Gopas and Gopis, but the entire Creation was enchanted by the sound of His 
flute. 

The Shrimad Bhagwat has a whole chapter, of twenty verses, upon the Venu Geet*. I 
suggest that you read them attentively. Such beauty of poetic literature is rare, even in 
Sanskrit. Shri Shukadevji Maharaj commences, by saying: 

^TVKrW^d M<JHI<=M<i'lP*RTI 

Ithham sharatsvacchjalam padmaakara - sugandhinaa, 
Nyavishad vaayunaa vaatam sagogopaalakoachyutah. 
10.21.1. 

"Parikshit, with the coming of the Sharad ritu*, Shri Krishna entered the forest with 
the cowherd boys. Padmas* bloomed in the lakes, and a fragrant breeze blew gently." 



231 



H^Hi=h<^'if^RT 'Padmaakarasugandhinaa ' means that Padma* would come, herself, to 
Vraja, and decorate each flower to ensure that the Lord did not forget her. She also 
desired to give Him pleasure, through the fragrance of her hands. 
Look - what is the essence of Vrindavan? One is the mountain, Giriraj. Another is the 
flowing river, and the third is the lucid lake. The lucid lake is the heart of the Lord's 
devotees. The river is the thought process which flows ceaselessly towards the Lord, 
and the Giriraj is the unshakable faith in the Lord. That means that in the seat of love, 
Vrindavan, the pure hearts of devotees, and their godly thoughts, help each other, and, 
their faith is rock steady. 

Kusumitavanaraajishushmabhringadvijakulaghushtasarahsarinmaheeghram, 
Madhupatiravagaahya chaarayangaah sahapashupaalabalashchukooja ve ^num. 
10.21.2. 

Spring is called Madhu. Shri Krishna is the Madhupati - the Lord of Spring. So, His 
coming is heralded by the blooming of beautiful flowers, the buzzing of bees in the 
fresh green of trees, and the chirping of flocks of birds. The Lord of Spring, Shri 
Krishna, enters this beautiful forest, along with Balaramji and the cowherd boys, to 
graze the cows. When the Lord went into the forest, He played His flute. The sound 
was so sweet that hearing it, the Gopis were filled with ecstatic love. 
There are many kinds of rasas*. Those who consider the Lord their son, feel 
Vatsalya*. Some call Vatsalya a rasa, and some call it a bhava*. In the same way, 
Sakhya is considered a rasa by some, and a bhava by others. In Bhavabhuti's opinion, 
only karuna is a rasa - T*T: v$ 'e^ko rasah karuna e \a '. Other rasas are only 
variations of 'Karun' rasa. The Sadhu-Mahatmas have said that the only rasa is the 
Shanta* rasa - ^TRTtsfo" ^cRt T*T: 'shaantopi navamo rasah '. 

Prem* and Madhur* are acknowledged romantic rasas. Shringar* rasa is not just a 
rasa - it is the king of rasas. That is why Bhojraj has said, "I do not acknowledge any 
other emotion, except Shringar - ^TT? ttct ^t: shringaar e \a rasah. " 
Now consider what the Gopis and Gopas are. Those who imbue the sweetness of Shri 
Krishna through their sense organs, are called Gopas and Gopis. They do not meditate, 
they do not apply their minds, they do not take up the position of being a sakshi*, and 
nor do they decide that they are one with the Brahman. On the contrary, they imbue 
the sweetness of the Lord with open eyes, and other sense organs. That is why they are 
called Gopas and Gopis. 

The Shruti*, and the Vrittis, are called Gopis. So are the subtle nerve channels like the 
Ida and the Pingla. The ancient texts have defined them, but those who try to study the 



232 



texts without the guidance of a knowledgeable teacher, are not able to grasp the full 
purport. 

All worldly desires of the Gopis were dispelled, when they heard the sound of the 
Lord's flute. Their hearts were filled only with a desire for Shri Krishna - cFfM 
WTtWT 've^nugeetam smarodayam. ' As soon as they thought of Shri Krishna, they 
craved to obtain Him. It was as though He came and stood before them, and they were 
saying, in their hearts: 

Varhaapeedam natavaravapuh karnayoh karnikaaram 
Vibhradvaasah kanakakapisham vaijayanteem cha maalaam, 
Randhraan ve ^noradharasudhayaa poorayan gopavrindai - 
Vrindaaranyam svapadaramanam praavishad geetakeertih. 
10.21.5. 

Shri Krishna is entering Vrindavan, with His companions. He wears a peacock feather 
on His head, and yellow flowers on His ears. A golden garment covers His body, and 
He wears the Vaijayanti Mala, which is a long, fragrant, multi-colored garland. He has 
dressed up as beautifully as a Hero in a play. He fills the holes of His flute with the 
nectar of His lips. The gwaal baals follow Him, singing His glories. Our land, called 
Vrindavan, is superior even to Vaikunth, and the Lord's footprints make it even more 
beautiful. 

Now, how did Shri Krishna become qeinl-s 'varhaapeeedam' - the one with the 
peacock feathers on his head? It is said that while dancing with the pet peacock of Shri 
Radharani*, a feather fell off from the peacock. Shri Krishna picked it up, and wore it 
on His head. Since then, He always wore peacock feathers on His head. This is how 
He was given the name of Varhapeeda. 

Shri Krishna is like the Hero of a play, like the bridegroom. The 'varenya'* of the 
Gayatri Mantra has become the 'vara' here. That is what makes Him 'natavaravapu'*. 
The word 'Ishwara'* contains the root 'Isha', and the 'vara' is a suffix. The 'var' in 
Ishwara, means authority, so Ishwara is the Lord of the whole world, the husband of 
all. This form of Shri Krishna is a role, chosen by Him, but He is, without doubt, the 
undisputed Master. 

The blue tinge of Shri Krishna is enhanced by the ornaments and garments which 
intersperse His body. The golden yellow garment He wears, is the color of Shri 
Radharani 's complexion. He wears a vana mala*, bracelets, armlets, and other 



233 



ornaments. As a result, the blueness of the exposed parts of His body, appears even 
lovelier. The nectar of Shri Krishna's lips - which pours into the holes of His flute - is 
not ordinary nectar. It is a divine elixir. That is why His flute sounds divine, too. His 
divinity is the reason for His footprints decorating Vrindavan. It is this, which makes 
Vrindavan superior (and more beautiful) than Vaikunth, which is the Lord's normal 
abode. 

One Acharya (scholar) has written that when Shri Krishna goes to the forest, and sees 
the footprints of Shri Radharani, He covers them with His pitambar*, to protect them 
from the heat of the sun. 

What is Shri Radharani? A worshipper - 3mf^T ' aaraadhikaa ' - is called Radhika - 
"*TT Tlf^TClf^T 'saa radhikaaraadhikaa. ' 

Vrindavan is a place of such love, that all the objects here - the vines and creepers, the 
trees and shrubs, animals and birds, even the grains of dust - are all worth 
contemplating upon. Contemplative objects can not be inanimate. They are chinmay*. 
The music in the hearts of the Gopis becomes vocal. The passionate love which fills 
their hearts rises up to be expressed. The love may have been born by love-making, or 
by the pangs of separation, or by pathos - because the pangs of separation make a 
person pitiful. The Gopis, therefore, began to tell each other - 

Akshanvataam falamidam na par am vidaamah 
Sakhyah pashoonanuvive ^shayatorvayasyaih, 
Vaktram vraje ^shasutayoranuve ^nu jushtam 
Yairvaa nipeetamanuraktakataakshamoksham. 
10. 21. 7. 

"My dear friend, the purpose of having eyes is not to witness. It is not meditation. 
Then - why have we been given eyes? Have we been given eyes to enable us to see 
the world? No, no! Not the world! We have been given eyes so that we can see 
Shyamsunder Shri Krishna. The purpose of having eyes is fulfilled only when we see 
Him." 

After this, the Gopis began to see Shri Krishna everywhere. They saw that the vines 
were oozing honey, when they heard the sound of Shri Krishna's flute. The Devis 
forgot themselves, the does stared unblinkingly, the cows forgot to graze, and the 



234 



calves forgot to suckle. Their bodies tingled with ecstasy, and they had tears in their 
eyes, and Govind in their hearts. 

"Look - even the peacocks are dancing at the sound of the flute. Peace envelopes the 
entire atmosphere. The birds on the trees watch Shri Krishna with their eyes wide 
open. The water of the Yamuna is stilled - it has ceased to flow. She is presenting the 
lotus flowers to Shri Krishna, and the earth is ecstatic. 

Oh, my friend! Is there any division of caste, and status, for Bhakti? No, of course not! 
Even the semi wild tribals are Bhaktas. Peacocks are Bhaktas, cows are Bhaktas, the 
earth is a Bhakta, and even the trees and creepers are Bhaktas. Bhakti abides where 
the Lord is, where His touch is, because it is the nature of every creature to love. 
My friend, when Shri Krishna wears the cows' nohana* like a garland, and the rope to 
catch the cows with, on His head, like a cap, He looks so attractive that everybody 
stops moving. They stop and stare, as though the spirit which enables us to see and 
hear is temporarily stupefied." 

Aspardanam gatimataam pulakastaroonaam 

Niryoga - paashakritalakshanayovichitram. 10. 21. 19. 

The Gopis would thus spend their time talking and singing about the nature of Shri 
Krishna, while He was away in the forest. The devotees of the Lord always spend 
their time, when separated from Him, by singing His glories. This fills their hearts 
with a surge of love for the Lord. 

Now, towards the end of autumn, in the season called Hemanta, the unmarried Gopis 
of Nanda's Vraja started a vrat of Devi Katyayini*. They would bathe in the Yamuna 
every morning, and pray, "Devi, we bow down to you - make Nanda nandan, Shri 
Krishna, our husband - H^'il^ci ^rfcT ^ ^ ?T TO: 'nandagopasutam de \ipatim me " 
kuru te " namah. 

Now comes the episode of 'cheer haran'*! Cheer haran means 'avaran bhang'* Please 
keep in mind that the experience of the indivisibility of the Brahman and the Atman 
occurs only after the false identification with the body is dispelled. Nobody can 
experience that the Atman and the Brahman are one, if this false impression continues. 
If a mother insists on hiding herself from her baby, telling him, "Don't look at my 
breast, people will think I am shameless," will she be able to feed him? What is her 
motherly love worth, if she refuses to feed her baby, and keeps herself covered? How 
can she experience the joys of maternal love, then? Neither she, nor her baby will 
experience happiness. In the same way, can a husband and wife experience conjugal 
bliss, if they keep their bodies covered and hidden from each other? 



235 



In precisely the same way, the curtain of Avidya stands between the Brahman and the 
jeeva. The experience of being one with the Brahman is not possible unless and until 
this veil is removed. The removal of all barriers is essential for the experience of the 
'rasa'. 

This is the reason why Shri Krishna removed the veil of ignorance, giving the excuse 
of stealing the Gopis' garments. He granted them the boon, "The wish in your hearts, 
for which you undertook the worship, will be granted. For the present, you must all 
return to your homes." 

It should be remembered that Shri Krishna was not alone at the time of the cheer 
haran. Other cowherd boys were with Him, including the brothers and relatives of the 
Gopis, when He stole their clothes. Hence, their approval for the Raas Leela* was 
won, and preparations began. However, the approval of many others had to be 
procured before the Raas Leela could take place. The Brahmins are the ones who have 
the books of religious strictures, and it is they who approve or oppose the religious 
and irreligious actions. Hence, it was necessary to impress them, and win their 
approval. The opportunity for this soon arose. 

One day, Balaramji and Shri Krishna accompanied the gwaal baals and cows, going 
far from Vrindavan, towards Mathura. It was full summer, and the sun was unbearably 
hot. The trees, however, provided a cool shade. Shri Krishna spoke to the cowherd 
boys, praising the trees. "Friends," He said, "Look at these trees. Their entire life is 
spent in doing good to others. They tolerate the wind, rain, and sun, but protect us 
form the harsh elements. All creatures are served by them. Nobody coming near them 
ever returns empty handed - they are sure to give something. Their leaves, fruit, 
flowers, shade, roots, wood, ashes, coals, etc. - are all used to meet the needs of the 
people. Theirs is the most superior life." 

Talking in this manner, Shri Krishna, Balaramji, the gwaal baals and the cows went 
towards the bank of the Yamuna. The cows drank deeply, and so did the young men. 
Some of gwaal baals came up to Shri Krishna and Balaramji. "Drinking water is not 
enough," they said. "We are extremely hungry, so give us some food." Shri Krishna 
said, "Since you are so hungry, do as I say. Just a little way off, the learned Brahmins 
of Mathura are doing a Yagya. Go there. Tell them Dau Dada's name, and My name, 
and say that we have asked for food." 

As per Shri Krishna's advice, the gwaal baals went to the place where the Yagya was 
being held. They told the Brahmins, "Rama and Krishna are waiting just a short 
distance away. They are hungry, so please give us some food. We know that we 
should not consume the food from a place where an animal is sacrificed, but there is 
nothing wrong in having food from your Yagya." 



236 



Deekshaayaah pashusansthaayaah sautraamanyaashcha sattamah, 

Anyatra deekshitasyaapi naannamashnan hi dushyati. 

10.23.8 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj says, "Parikshit, these Brahmins failed to remember that it 
was the Lord of the universe, who was asking them for food! They considered Rama- 
Krishna to be ordinary mortals, and did not show adequate respect. Actually, these 
Brahmins had the mentality of ignorant children, but considered themselves to be very 
learned and wise. So, they did not respond to the gwaal baals in any way. The 
cowherd boys returned dejected, and told Rama-Krishna all that had transpired." 

"H^TT ftrmT: ^R^r f^TWft: 1 1 

Na te^ yadomiti prochurna ne^ti cha parantapa, 

Gopaa niraashaah pratye^tya tathochuh krishnaraamayoh. 

10.23. 12. 

Now, see the messages we get form this episode. One is that if the people living 
around us are hungry, while ablution after ablution is poured into the ritual fire, then 
the yagya is not in keeping with the strictures of Dharma. Yagya is not to be 
undertaken if people have to go hungry. It is also written in the Manusmriti* that we 
should undertake a Yagya only when we have enough wealth to support servants, 
employees, relatives and the family, for three years. 

Another point, worth noting, is that the Brahmins avoided replying to the gwaal baals. 
What does this mean? It means that there are two paths to salvation for humans. One 
is to acquiesce, by saying Oum. The other is to deny, by saying 'ne'ti, ne'ti'*, because 
the entire Creation is nothing but the essence of the Oum form of the Lord - 3o,w v$ 
WFi^omkaara e\a sarvam '. This is elaborated upon and emphasized universally. 
When the gwaal baals returned empty handed, and narrated everything, Shri Krishna 
first had a good laugh. Then He said, "Now, go to the wives of the Brahmins. Give 
them My name, and ask for food. They are sure to oblige. You will not have to return 
empty handed." 

The gwaal baals went to the wives of the Brahmins. When they heard what they boys 
had to say, their hearts overflowed with love. They wasted no time in going to Shri 
Krishna with all kinds of food. They obtained a vision of the Lord, which was so 
fantastic that Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu fainted with ecstasy when he heard its 
description. You may enjoy the flavor in the words of Shri Shukadevji: 



237 



Shyamam hiranyaparidhi vanamaalyabarhadhaatupravaala - 
Natave ^shamanuvrataanse \ 
Vinyastahastamitare ^na dhunaanamabjam 
Karnotpalaalakakapola - mukhaabjahaasam. 
10. 23. 22. 

The Yagya patinees, wives of the Brahmins, saw that Shri Krishna's blue-hued form 
was covered with a glimmering pitambar. He wore the vanamala*, and a mor mukut* 
on His head. He was dressed like a Hero on the stage, with clusters of flower buds 
hanging on His body. One hand rested on the shoulder of His friend, and He held a 
lotus in the other one. He wore earrings of fresh flowers. His curls touched His cheeks 
charmingly, and a faint smile lingered on His lips. 

The Yagya patnees were enthralled by this divine sight. They served food to Shri 
Krishna, Balaram, and the gwaal baals. Then they eulogized Shri Krishna, received 
His Grace, and returned to the place where the Yagya was being held. 
When the Brahmins learnt how deeply spiritual was the love of their wives, for Shri 
Krishna, they began to berate themselves. "Of what use is all our knowledge?" they 
lamented. "Our noble lineage and high caste are valueless, because we are turned 
away form the Lord! We have no depth of feeling, or Bhakti. What is the use of our 
life? We are so wretched that we refused to give food to Him, who is our all in all!" 

facfr ^ r?MKi^T r°i^sii ^ r^fr^r 1 1 

Dhig janma nastrivrdvidyaam dhig vratam dhig bahugyataam, 
Dhig kulam dhik kriyaadaakshyam vimukhaa ye " tvagshokshaje \ 
10.23.39. 

The gwaal baals and Gopa-kumaris*, were all ready for the Raas Leela. Now, even the 
Brahmins became favorable. Shri Krishna then decided that the Devtas should also be 
made favorable. To facilitate this, the bright fortnight - Shuklapaksha - of the lunar 
month of Kartik, arrived. Preparations commenced for the ritual worship of Indra - 
the King of the Devtas. 

Maiya dressed up her darling children, Shyam* and Balaram, with special care. She 
put on a tilak* of gorochan*, and placed pitambars over their shoulders. Then she 
said, "My sons, go and bow down to your father." Both the boys went, and bowed 
down to Nandababa. The Shri Krishna asked lovingly, "Baba, what is all this 
preparation for?" 



238 



Nandababa said, "My son, this is the day we worship Indra. It has been the family 
tradition for many generations. We believe that we get the rains by the Grace of Indra. 
Because of the rain, we get food - which enables us and our cattle to survive. This is 
why we worship Indra." 

"Baba," persisted Shri Krishna, "What kind of tradition is this? The Indra of Heaven 
lives in Heaven. We have never even seen him. We have no Kingdom, nor any city. 
We do not even have a village! We are vanavasis*, and live at the foot of the Giriraj*. 

Na nah puro janapadaa na graaman na grihaa vayam, 
Nityam vanaukasastaat vanashailanivaasinah. 
10. 24. 24. 

Therefore, our Devta is the Giriraj. It is the mountain who gives us fruits and food. It 
is Giriraj, who our cattle graze upon. Then, why don't you worship Giriraj instead?" 
Shri Krishna convinced Nandababa by His reasoning. All the other Gopas also agreed 
with Shri Krishna. He was ready to shatter Indra' s vanity, of having powers of 
destruction. Nandababa and the gwaals used the items of worship, which they had 
prepared for Indra' s worship, to worship the Giriraj. 

Now, note that although Shri Krishna seemed just a child, He is, here, the Lord 
incarnate. He is an exception. You have been told earlier, that if even a child says 
something which is rational and relevant, we should accept the suggestion. Our 
scriptures have stated that Dharma is harmed when even elders speak irreligiously - 
^Rd^H^^iAq sFfFTfr: y^iNrl 'Yuktiheenavichaare^shu dharmahaanih prajaayate' ". So, 
the older generation should never claim greater experience and knowledge, to discard 
a good suggestion made by a youngster. 

See for yourself, how revolutionary was the step taken by Shri Krishna. He rejected 
the Indra puja. And, what was the result? Indra's real form was exposed before all the 
people of Vraja, and his inflated ego was shattered. 

It has been seen that when people get used to receiving gifts and tokens of respect, 
they get so habituated to this, that they are distressed if this is curtailed. They get 
angry, thinking, "Why wasn't I given gifts and respect this time?" They do not realize 
that gifts and respect are a token of the reverence which is in the heart of the one who 
gives them. The receiver has no right to expect either respect, or any gift. 
Indra had begun to accept the worship of the Vrajavasis, as his due. When he was not 
given this worship, he got angry with them. A perfect example arose, of how anger 
blinds one - whether it is a human being, or a demi-god. Indra angrily ordered the rain 



239 



clouds to destroy all the cows and animals in Vraja - T T?H WW 'pashoon nayata 
sankshyam '. 

Oh, God! The cows were to be punished for the fault of the Gopas! Indra's anger 
overcame his sense of justice, and so he ordered the pralaykari* clouds to attack 
Vraja. 

The clouds began to pour sheets of water over Vraja. Lightening flashed all round. 
The windswept rain worsened. Large chunks of hail fell from the sky. The Vrajavasis 
were terrified. They surrendered to Shri Krishna, begging Him to protect them. The 
Lord said, "Do not worry. Come under the Govardhan*." Saying this, He lifted the 
mountain. 

You may have read the story of Subandhu in the Rig Veda. It is stated there, that the 
hand of a human is Ishwara, it is even greater than the Ishwara - ^ f^ft ^wih, sft 
^ FMf "H'mtk: 'ayam me " hasto bhagavaan, ayam me " hasto bhagavattarah. ' 
This means that a person who has hands (the ability to act) does not need to look up to 
God, and ask Him to do this or that. My friend, use your hand, and offer all you do, to 
the Lord. 

This is exactly what Shri Krishna did, showing Indra His hand, and sending the 
unspoken message, "You want to harass the Vrajavasis? Then see how I place the 
mountain on your head!" He did this because the Devta, Indra, abides in the hands. 
The Lord wanted to shatter Indra's vanity, so He lifted up the mountain, and placed it 
on the tip of the organ of action - the hand - which symbolizes Indra. Then He said, 
"Now, Sonny, lift this! Not I, but you lift the mountain. Not only that, keep it lifted 
until your ego is shattered to smithereens!" 

Indra felt ashamed. He ordered the clouds to cease raining, and Vraja was saved. All 
of you know the story. 

When Shri Krishna had held the Govardhan up for seven days at a stretch, the gwaal 
baals said, "Kanhaiya, you have not had any rest at all. You have held up the 
mountain on one hand. Your hand must be paining. Shift the mountain to Shridama's 
hand for a while. Allow us to massage this left hand of yours, to help the blood 
circulation. If you feel that this suggestion is insulting to you, then don't give the 
mountain to him - just shift it to your right hand. This will allow your left hand to get 
some rest." 

Shri Krishna said, "My brothers, please don't worry about Me. If you insist on 
helping, just prop up the mountain with your wooden staffs - that will be helpful to 
Me." 

That is why, whenever the gwaal baals got angry, they'd say, "See here, Kanhaiya. 
You did not lift the Giriraj all by yourself. We also lent a helping hand by propping 
our staffs to help you." 



240 



This proves that to obtain the Grace of God, people need to put in an effort. A sadhak 
cannot progress without this. 

When his ego was shattered, Indra came with the Kamadhenu*. He eulogized the 
Lord, and crowned Him as Govind, or Upendra*. Kamadhenu, however, maintained 
that Indra may be the Indra (King) of the Devtas; the cows did not accept him as their 
Indra. Since that day, the Indra of the cows is the Lord Incarnate Govind-Gopal, and 
not the Indra of heaven. 

The Devtas naturally became favorable after this, and so did all the Gopas. At about 
the same time, one more incident occurred, which enhanced Shri Krishna's image 
further. 

It so happened that one morning, Nandababa woke up very early, and went to the 
Yamuna for a bath. It was the twelfth lunar date, and Nandababa wished to complete 
his vrat of the eleventh day, on time. He had not, therefore, gone against the rules of 
the rituals by bathing so early. The critics are quite right in stating that Nandababa' s 
Yamuna snaan* was perfectly in order. 

The demon who lived there, however, caught hold of Nandababa, and took him to the 
land of Varuna Devta. The news spread all over Vraja, that Nandababa had been 
drowned in the Yamuna, while bathing. A wave of grief spread over all the people in 
Vraja. Shri Krishna knew what had happened. He jumped into the Yamuna, and 
reached the Varuna loka*. Varuna welcomed Shri Krishna with full honors. 
Nandababa was very much there. He was flabbergasted to see the demigod worship 
Shri Krishna. "Oh!" he thought, "My son is so great that the demigods worship him!" 
Shri Krishna returned to Vraja with Nandababa. 
When the gwaal baals heard this, they were displeased with Shri Krishna. They 
taunted Him, saying, "Nandababa is your father, so you pretended that he was 
drowning, and took him to see the Varuna loka; but you did not show us this land!" 
Shri Krishna said, "All right, friends. Don't be upset. Come, I will show you a place 
which is even better." He took all the gwaal baals to Vaikunth. Once there, Shri 
Krishna sat on His own throne, and all the cowherd boys sat around, watching. They 
saw Brahmaji eulogizing Shri Krishna on one side, and on the other side, Shankarji sat 
in deep meditation. Laxmiji's condition was such that she trembled lest the Lord be 
displeased. 

The gwaal baals asked, "How do we reach our Shri Krishna?" 
"You cannot go near Him," they were told. 

The gwaal baals retorted, "All right, if we can't go near him, tell us - where is his 
flute? Where is his mor mukut? Where is his cane? We cannot see any of these." 
Not receiving any reply, the gwaal baals said, "What will we do here, in this place? 
We prefer to live in Vraja." They returned to Vraja with Shri Krishna. 



241 



Thus having impressed everybody, and having made them all favorable, the great day 
came, when the Raas Leela took place. Shri Shukadevji Maharaj began to describe it 
thus: 

■CRofFrfq ?fT m\: ¥K«lr$?dHRrl<=M: I 

Bhagwaanapi taa raatreeh sharadotfullamallikaah, 
Veekshya rantum manashchakre " yogamaayaamupaashritah. 
10. 29. 1. 

You see, the word 'Raas', means the total of all the rasas*. Shri Krishna is the 
personification of all types of joys - T^fHT w$ TRT: I TRT ttst trt: I T^fr <l I T^t ^cfT 
3TFT^" *rafrT 'rasaanaam samooho raasah. Rasa e\a raasah. Raso vai sah. Rasam 
labdhvaa aanandee bhavati. ' 

One day, Shri Krishna felt that He should spread and increase His essence of Bliss. 
When He saw that there was no scope for this, in either Time, or Space, He said, "All 
right, I will imbue it by Myself, but increase the numbers through which Bliss is 
imbued. The more people imbuing the Bliss, the more the Bliss will spread and 
increase." In keeping with this decision, Shri Krishna had created the Gopis, and the 
Gopas, and the Divine Vrindavan. 

The Raas Leela is not an ordinary Leela. The renunciation of the Gopis has been 
described, before the Leela took place. The Gopis had given up all worldly 
considerations, before they went to Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna proffered the 
arguments of the Poorva Meemansa philosophy, and the rigid strictures of orthodox 
religion. He took up a stand of rejecting their coming thus, to Him. The Gopis, 
however, countered with arguments from the Uttar Meemansa philosophy. Shri 
Krishna was placed in the position of upholding the first philosophy, while the Gopis 
took the stand of the Upanishads. This philosophy is not subject to the dictates of the 
previous, narrower strictures. The Gopis said, 

M *T°rR T ifej ^^Rt 

■R^rTT *R^T floras TTT cq^TRJTH 

Mayivam vibhorhati bhavaan gaditum nrishamsam 
Santyajya sarvavishayaanstava paadamoolam, 
Bhaktaa bhajasva duravagraha maa tyajaasmaan 
De \o yathaadipurusho bhajate " mumukshoon. 
10. 29. 31. 



242 



This is the love song of the Gopis. In these verses they have revealed their innermost 
feelings. "Shri Krishna, without You, we have no life in us, and no life to live." 
Restrictions of time do not permit a detailed description of all that the Gopis said. You 
can read it in the original, and understand its relevance and depth. I will only say that 
Shri Krishna - who is everybody's Atma - accepted the Gopis, when He saw the 
exquisite agony they felt. He began to play with them. He arranged that every Gopi 
could simultaneously experience the Bliss of this play. 

As they frolicked with the Lord, the Gopis began to think themselves superior to all 
other women in the world - this was a mistake. It is a lapse, if we focus upon anything 
other than the object of our love. It is an obstacle on the path of love, if our focus 
shifts from the one we love, to any other; or even ourselves. In other words, our focus 
should be only upon the Paramatma. It should not be allowed to shift on the 'Aham'*, 
or Idam*. The same principal applies to tattvagnan. If the Aham is in sharp focus, then 
the Brahman is known by the method of Mukhya Samanadhikaran*, but if Creation is 
considered to be an illusion, then the Brahman is known by negating both the Aham 
and the Idam, through the method of Badh Samanadhikaran*, to dispel the illusion 
which rests upon the sub-stratum of the ultimate Reality, the essence of Creation. 
So, when the Gopis began to think about their individuality, while frolicking with Shri 
Krishna, it turned into an obstacle in the Raas. Shri Krishna noticed that the Gopis' 
focus had shifted from Him, to their own small selves. He vanished form view, with 
the intention of destroying their vanity and pride - 

Taasaam tat saubhagamadam veekshya maanam cha he ^shavah, 
Prashamaaya prasaadaaya tatraivaantaradheeyata. 
10.29.48 

When a person starts looking at his own, small self, he loses sight of the indivisible 
Paramatma. Whether you see the conditioned 'other' (called Idam), or whether you 
see the individual I (called Aham), no conditioned individual exists, apart from the 
basic sub-stratum of the ultimate Reality. That, which appears to glimmer in the sub- 
stratum of the essence (ultimate reality), is actually an illusion. It is not real. So, when 
the Gopis started to look at themselves, they could no longer see Shri Krishna. Then, 
they became desperate. 

You see, a person's life contains both viraha* and sanyog*. Sanyog causes pleasure, 
and viraha causes pain. However, viraha contains love. So, of course, does sanyog. 
The Gopis showed us, through the way they lived, how to be with the Lord in both 
situations. 



243 



When Shri Krishna vanished from sight, the Gopis felt desperate. At first they went 
about asking the trees and plants, if they knew where Shri Krishna had gone. Then, 
they began to act out His Leelas, as though they had lost their senses. Then, when they 
found Shri Radharani, the thought occurred to them, "If we go on looking for Shri 
Krishna, He will continue to run away from us. This will cause Him discomfort." So, 
all the Gopis gathered on the bank of the Yamuna, and started singing the song, which 
has become famous as the 'Gopi Geet'*. 

This Gopi Geet is descriptive poetry. It conjures up word pictures, because of the rules 
of the metre. The seventh letter is usually the same as the first letter, and generally the 
others match, as well. This particular metre is called Kanakamanjari'. You can enjoy 
hearing a portion of the Gopi Geet. 

Jayati te ^dhikam janmanaa vrajah shrayata indiraa shashvadatra hi, 
Dayita drishyataam dikshu taavakaastvayi dhritaasavastvaam vichinvate \ 
10.31.1 

The Gopis say, "Beloved Shri Krishna, Your manifestation has enhanced Vraja's 
greatness. You have protected us from a number of perils. Today, however, You are 
killing us with your eyes - is this not slaughter? Please, allow Yourself to be 
glimpsed, just once, before we die. You are not just the son of a Gopi - You are the 
actual Paramatma, who abides in all hearts. Please, do give us a vision of Your lotus- 
like face, and touch us with Your lotus-like feet. Place Your hand upon our heads. 
Give us a taste of the nectar of Your lips. We have survived only by listening to the 
talk about You. We cannot survive even for a moment without You. 

wfer for ^r^rt foOT ?r str™i 

Prahasitam priya pre ^maveekshanam viharanam cha te ' dhyaanamangalam, 
Rahasi samvido yaa hridisprishah kuhaka no manah kshobhayanti hi. 
10.31.10. 

Dearest, we are enthralled by Your face, so full of love; by Your upraised hand, and 
by Your sweet words. Our grief is caused by the fact that You are hiding in the dark, 
and may be hurt by a thorn pricking Your foot, or a sharp blade of grass cutting Your 
tender feet. Our hearts are bursting with the pain of this possibility. You are our life, 
You are our life's spirit, and You are our whole world." 



244 



When the Gopis sobbed their hearts out, lamenting in this manner, Shri Krishna 
manifested again. He did not descend from a tree or a mountain. Nor did He arise 
from the Yamuna, because He had been hidden in their midst all the while. 

MldlM*«R: Weft W^WT*T2T: I I 

Taasaamaavirabhoocchaurih smayamaanamukhaambujah, 
Peetambaradharah sragvee saakshaanmanmathamanmathah. 
10.32.2. 

Shri Krishna smilingly told the Gopis, "Oh, Gopis, My feelings for you are on My 
face, and I am all smiles. But - how much you harassed Me every day! I just hid 
Myself for a while today, and see how upset you got! Now, you must never again 
show any sign of ego." 

The Gopis welcomes Shri Krishna lovingly, showing Him full respect. They spread 
out their odhnis* on the bank of the Yamuna, to make a soft seat for the Lord. They 
asked Shri Krishna to be seated upon it. Then they began to speak to Him about love. 
The next episode will be described tomorrow. 



Om Shantih! Shantih! Shantih! 



245 



BHAGWATAMRIT 



Pravarchan XI 
(Chapter X) 

Loving meditation of God includes meditating upon those who have loved 
the Lord, and received His Grace. So much so, that the meditation includes 
even the trees and vines touched by Him, and the ground He trod. Objects of 
meditation are never inanimate or material - they are objects of meditation. 
That is why they are called 'chinmay'*. The world of the senses (used for 
worldly interaction) transports us to a unique, divine world. That is why 
meditation is considered to be of great importance. 

Come, let us go to Vrindavan's world of divine love, where - as per 
yesterday's talk - the Lord, Shri Krishna, sits on the bank of the Yamuna, in 
eager anticipation of the Raas Leela. The Lord there is not nirguna; He is 
saguna. He is not nirakar, He is sakar. And, He is not a Devta, He is in 
human form; but that form is beautiful in every aspect! The asana* which 
the Gopis picture in their hearts, is not His seat. His seat is the pile of 
odhnis*, which have been worn by them, and are now laid, one upon the 
other, for Him to sit upon. The fabric is damp with their tears, and it carries 
the stains of the sandal paste and saffron, which they smear their chests with. 
It is this asana, which has been spread out for the Lord to sit upon. Where in 
the world will the Lord find such an asana? Seated upon this asana, is the 
pitambardhari*, murlimanohar*, mor mukuti* Vrajaraj Kumar*. Some 
Gopis hold His feet, and some hold His hands in theirs - they are making 
sure that He does not escape again! 

The Gopis now wanted to place some questions to the Lord. Just as an urge 
to question is important in the quest of knowledge, it is equally important for 
the Rasa-vidya*. The Gopis asked, "Beloved Shyamsundar, there are some 
who love those who love them. Some, who love even those who do not love 
them. And, there are some who feel no love for either of them. Tell us, 
which are the most superior?" 

Bhajatonubhajantye ^ka e ^ka e ^tadviparyayam, 

Nobhayaanshcha bhajantye^ka e^tanno bruhi saadu bhoh. 10. 32. 16. 



246 



Shri Krishna replied, "Gopis, listen! Those who love, in return of love, are 
worldly people. Those who love even those who don't return their love, are 
Parents, and Saints. Their love rises from innate compassion, and remains 
unaffected, whether it is returned or not. Such love encompasses everybody. 
As for those who love neither the people who love them, nor those who 
don't - you must gauge their level yourselves. 

^IrHKIHI ^JM^IHI SPfcTW I I 

Bhajatopi na vai ke^chid bhajantyabhajatah kutah, 
Aatmaaraamaa hyaaptakaamaa akritagyaa gurudruhah. 
10. 32. 19. 

The ones, who love neither, are of four kinds. One kind, are those who are 
immersed in deep meditation. They are completely unaware of who loves 
them, and who doesn't. The second kind, are those who have attained the 
Paramatma, but interact in the world, constantly seeing the Lord in all. They 
have equanimity for everyone. The third kind are those who have no idea as 
to who loOves them and who doesn't. They are insane. The fourth kind, are 
the 'gurudruha' - the terribly wicked - who love neither those who love 
them, nor those who don't love them. They are completely selfish and 
continue to give sorrow to others." 

The Gopis began to look at each other. "Friend, which kind is our 
Shyamsundar? He is not an Atmaram, blissfully immersed in His Atma. He 
is not an aaptakama, having no desires whatsoever. Nor is He kritaghnya - 
full of ingratitude. Then, which type is He? Is He terribly wicked, that He 
does not love us, even though we love Him?" Answering the questions put 
to Him by the Gopis, Shri Krishna caught His dupatta* in His hands, and 
said: 

Naa hum tu sakhyo bhajatopi jantun bhajaamyameeshaamanuvrittivrittaye \ 
Yathaadhano labdhdhane^ vinashte^ tacchintayaanyannibhrito na ve^da. 
10. 32. 20. 

Gopis, I am not like what you think. I do not love those who love Me, just to 
ensure that people's love does not remain superficial. I want it to enter the 
core of their hearts, into every part of their bodies." 



247 



Clarifying this further, Shri Krishna explained the matter to the Gopis, by 
giving the example of a poor man who is overjoyed at the unexpected 
attainment of great wealth. He gets attached to his wealth, and begins to love 
it. What would his condition be, were he to lose it suddenly? He would be as 
poor as he used to be. However, he would not be able to accept that poverty 
again. He would suffer. 

"In the same way, when I leave someone, after meeting them, My purpose is 
to increase their love for Me. I disappear, after appearing before people, in 
order to become established more firmly in their hearts, and manifest there. 

h^r^sf ^rc^rercifsri ^Rrm^r fsf^n^nft cr: i 

^ #f?eq cT^^T: nirl^ld WJ^TT I I 1°.^.^. 

Na paaraye^ham niravadyasanyujaam svasaadhukrityam vibudhaayushaapi 

vah, 

Yaa maabhajan durjarage^hashrunkhalaaha samvrishchya tad vah 
pratiyaatu saadhunaa. 
10. 32. 22. 

My beloved Gopis, you gave up this world for Me, gave up your other world 
for Me, and gave up all self-interest. You gave up everything, and just loved 
Me. Your love should not be left unripe. - it should now be fully ripened. 
This is why I gave you viyog. The fulfillment of sanyog remains incomplete 
without the experience of the pangs of separation. 

Na vinaa vipralambhe^na sambhogo pushtimashnute\ 

Regarding Myself. I am indebted to you, Gopis! Even if I added Brahmaji's 
life span to My own, godly, life span, and tried My best to repay your debt 
all through eternity, I shall fail to do so." 

Hearing such talk from Shri Krishna, Himself, the pain of separation 
vanished from the hearts of the Gopis. And, the nritya* of the Raas began. 
This Raas nritya has three forms. In the first one, Shri Krishna is one, and 
the Gopis are many. Which means, there is one Krishna, and many Gopis. 
This is called the 'Halleesaka Nritya'. In the language of Drama, just one 
Krishna dances to the beat, with such speed, that each Gopi feels that he is 
dancing with her. 

In the second form of the Raas nritya, there are two Gopis, with one Krishna 
- rfrai W$ jprtsNb 'taasaam madhye^ dvayordvayoh '. In this, each Gopi has a 



248 



hand of Shri Krishna on her shoulder. One is to His left and the other, to His 
right. This contains no illusion of rasa*. 

In the third form, there are as many Krishnas as Gopis, because He uses His 
yogic powers to manifest in that many forms. 

Kritvaa taavantamaatmaanam yaavateergopayoshitah. 

Note the Adhyatmik form of the third kind of Raas nritya. It is as though a 
seeker of the ultimate truth were to study Vedanta, listen to discourses and 
ponder deeply upon them. Then, he undertakes the practice of 
nididhyaasan*. He would get flashes of being one with the Brahman - sdJI^R 
^frT 'brahmaakaar vritti ' - one after another, with gaps of normal awareness 
in-between. This is the experience in this dance. The meeting point of the 
two emotions of WR1 ' bhaavaakaara '* , and 'brahmaakaar'* is the 
Brahman which has become the Raas nritya. 

¥RW ?fe cfT tef^ M^: I I *° 

Paadanyaasairbhujavidhutibhih sasmitairbhroovilaasair 
Bhjyanmadhaishchalakuchapataih kundalairgandalolaih, 
Svidyanmukhyah kabarashanaagranthayah krishnavadhvo 
Gaayantyastam tadita iva taa me ^ghachakre " vire juh. 
10. 33. 8. 

The steps of the dancing Gopis fall back and forth. Sometimes, they smile, 
and sometimes they move their eyebrows. Their waists twist as they dance, 
and their garments slip and slither. Their earrings touch their cheeks, as they 
swing to the rhythm. Beads of perspiration glisten on their faces, caused by 
their energetic dancing. The darling Gopis of the Natavara* Nandalal* are 
thus singing and dancing with the Lord. It is as though Shri Krishna's forms 
are like dark clouds, and the fair Gopis in-between, shine like lightening. 
Who are the Gopis? They are the wives of Shri Krishna. They carry His 
weight - cie^i ^fcT cr^cT: 'vahanti iti vadhvah '. Shri Krishna goes wherever the 
Gopis go. The one who binds, is also called 'vadhoo'* - w^F3 ^ cf^r: 
'vadhnanti iti vadhvah '. A vadhoo is the one who binds her husband with 
her arms, and bears his weight. 



249 



So, the entire Creation is amazed at the sight of Shri Krishna's nritya with 
the Gopis. All the conjugal stances described in the Kama Shastra* appear 
here. Everything goes on, but Shri Krishna is blissful within Himself. He is 
supremely unaffected, because He is 'avikaari'*. He imprisoned Kama, 
before organizing the Raas vilas*. 

Shri Krishna sent the Gopis back to their homes, when the pleasures of the 
Raas were completed. At this point, Parikshit had some doubts, and he 
asked, "How can the Raas vilas of the Lord be explained within the 
framework of the protection of Dharma?" 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj replied, "You see, Shri Krishna manifested as a 
human, in order to attract all the creatures of the world towards Him. Hence, 
what would this Leela of His be worth, unless the liberated as well as those 
susceptible to worldly passions, were both attracted to Him? 
The very purpose of this Avatar was to draw every creature towards 
Himself, regardless of their position or condition. Those attracted to 
luxuries, would be attracted to the luxurious Shri Krishna. Those attracted to 
material objects, would be attracted by His riches. Those filled with desire 
would be attracted by His love, and the jeevanmuktas* would be attracted to 
Him as their own Atma. The descent of the Lord is with the intention of 
entrancing everybody, with love for the Lord, instead of for worldly objects. 
However - beware! No human should ever - even in his imagination - think 
of emulating Shri Krishna's Leelas. Because, anyone attempting to imbue 
poison, like Shankarji did, will be killed" - 

Naitat samaachare ^jjaatu manasaapi hyaneeshawarah, 
Vinashyatyaacharan maudhyaadyathaa rudrobdhijam visham. 
10. 33. 31. 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj added that after a jeeva obtains tattvagnan, he 
becomes a jeevanmukta. No further bondage of action remains. Then, when 
we speak of the one who has never been bound by actions, and never will be, 
is it not an illusion to imagine the bondage of the Lord? 

Yatpadapankajaparaaganishe \atriptaa 
yogaprabhaavavidhutaakhilakarmabandhaah, 



250 



Svairam charanti munayopi na nahyamaanaastasye^chchayaattavapushah 
kuta e Va bandhah. 
10. 33. 35. 

In the end, Shri Shukadevji speaks of the reward of listening to the Raas 
Leela. He says that whoever hears, or sees - with faith - the frolics of Shri 
Krishna with the women of Vraja, and believes in its authenticity as its being 
a play of the Lord Incarnate, finds himself free of all desire. He obtains the 
highest kind of Bhakti. 

^IHI'fcm^HlrilWui «fa I I 

Vikreeditam vrajavadhoobhiridam cha vishnoh 
Shraddhaanvitonushrunuyaadatha varnaye ^dyah, 
Bhaktim paraam bhagavati pratilabhya kaamam 
Hridrogamaashvapahinotyachire ^na dheerah. 
10. 33. 40. 

There is no harm in emphasizing repeatedly, that the Lord undertook such a 
frolic, so that even the most lustful and romantic persons would be attracted 
to Him. It was done with the purpose of shifting people's focus from worldly 
attractions to divine attractions. It was to develop detachment towards 
worldly objects, without even dwelling upon their evils; without even 
needing to use discrimination. 

If detachment can be developed by the application of vivek, using the 'Tvam 
padartha'*, why can't it be developed by using the 'Tat padartha'*? When 
we contemplate upon the meaning of the term 'Tvam' (You), we get 
detached from the world. Similarly, when we contemplate upon the meaning 
of the term 'Tat' (That), our mental focus shifts from the material to the 
Lord. The discrimination between the eternal and the transitory, which is in 
the 'You' factor, is the same as the discrimination in the 'That' factor, and 
this discrimination is called Bhakti. (N.B. This is a reference to the Vedic 
sentence, Tat-tvam-asi, or tattvamasi, meaning 'You are That'. It indicates 
the oneness of the individual soul and the Brahman) When one discriminates 
between the Atma-anatma*, we can manage, even if we lack shraddha*. 
However, when it comes to discriminating about Ishwara, and accepting the 
unseen Lord, the shraddha is needed. Parabhakti* comes from this shraddha, 
and the disease-like desires of the heart are dispelled by Parabhakti. 



251 



The Vrajavasis toured the Ambika van*, after the Maha Raas*. There, they 
worshipped the Pashupati* Shankar and the Devi. A huge python lived in the 
forest, and he caught hold of Nandababa. Nandababa was terrified. 
Ultimately, Shri Krishna liberated this enormous snake by touching it with 
His foot. The python was a Vidyadhara* in his past life. He had become a 
python because of a curse from some Rishi. He eulogized Shri Krishna. 
After that, everybody returned to Vraja, singing the praises of Shri Krishna. 
At the advent of spring, both the brothers - Balaramji and Shri Krishna - 
began to dance. The Gopis were entranced to see them, and began to sing 
and dance with them. This routine became so well established that it 
continues to this day. The Ahirs* dance and sing in every locality, 
throughout the seasons of Vasanta* and Sharad*. 

A demon called Shankhachuda came one day, when Balaramji and Shri 
Krishna were dancing and singing with the Gopis. He caught hold of the 
Gopis, and ran off with them. The terrified Gopis cried out in panic. 
Balaramji and Shri Krishna chased Shankhachuda, and rescued the Gopis, 
but the demon ran for his life. Balaramji stayed back to protect the Gopis, 
but Shri Krishna continued the chase. Ultimately, He killed the demon, 
plucked out the precious gem from his forehead, and gave it to Balaramji. 
The episode of the Yugal Geet* follows the killing of Shankhachuda. It is 
the fourth of the five love songs of the Gopis. Apart from the first and last 
two verses, the other twenty- five shlokas are called the 'Yugal Geet'. What 
does it contain? It is a conversation between the Gopis, and the subject is 
Shri Krishna. When Shri Krishna goes to the forest to graze the cattle, the 
Gopis go with Him in spirit, and discuss His Leelas. See a sample of their 
conversation - 

<*IH«llg#ddlH<=bMVil clf^ldlJWlftd^uiHJ 
oMHHI'luWHftdfa-dl: ^Mf^dHW I I 

Vaamabaahukritavaamakapolo valgitabhruradharaarpitave ^num, 
Komalaangulibhiraashritamaargam gopya eerayati yatra mukundah. 
Vyomayaanavanitaah saha siddhairvismitaastadupadhaarya salajjaah, 
Kaamamaarganasamarpitachittaah kashmalam yayurapasmritaneevyah. 
10.35.2-3. 

The Gopis speak among themselves, saying, "Oh, my friend, our beloved 
Shyamsundar always bestows love on all who love Him; He even grants 
liberation to those who hate Him! When He puts His flute to His lips, and 



252 



His fingers run over the holes of the flute, the lilting tune is such that - leave 
alone all others - even the wives of the spiritually evolved come on their air 
planes, with their husbands, and lose consciousness." 

This is the kind of talk with which the Gopis beguile their time. Their minds 
are always focused upon Shri Krishna. They become filled with His essence. 
An ambience of joy and exhilaration used to prevail all over Vraja, due to 
the Leela and songs of Shri Krishna. 

It was on one such day that the demon Arishtasura* came, in the form of a 
Vrishabha. Vrishabha is called 'Dharma'. The purpose of Dharma is to 
fulfill human desires. It is called 'Kamadhuk'* - one can obtain whatever 
one wants from it. However, when demonic tendencies enter Dharma, it is 
prepared to kill the Lord, and His devotees. This Vrishabha did exactly that. 
So, the Lord pushed him back, and in the end, killed him. 
Shri Shukadevji Maharaj said, "Parikshit, the Leela of the Lord is strange. 
You are aware of the deep devotion of Naradji, and of how he goes around, 
helping people to see the Lord. After Arishtasura was killed, Naradji had a 
sudden impulse to visit Kansa. He told Kansa, "Look here, Kansa, the little 
baby girl who escaped from your hands and flew into the sky, was the 
daughter born to Nanda-Yashoda. Vasudev-Devki's sons are Balaram and 
Krishna, and they have killed your demons." 

Kansa was furious when he heard this. He drew out his sword to kill 
Vasudev-Devki, but Naradji advised him to deal with the matter with greater 
tact. 

Having said this, Naradji took his leave and departed. Kansa put Vasudev 
and Devki into prison again. He called Keshi* and other demons, and told 
them to kill Balaram-Krishna. Keshi went obediently to Vraja, with the 
intention of killing Shri Krishna. 

Keshi used to neigh like Hayagreeva*, and his neighs terrified the people of 
Vraja. However, who can bully Shri Krishna? He thrust His hand into 
Keshi 's mouth. Keshi was suffocated to death. 

Naradji came to Shri Krishna, when Keshi was killed. He eulogized the Lord 
in seclusion, and said, "Lord, it is a matter of great joy that You playfully 
killed the demon Keshi, who wore the form of a horse. He was so 
frightening, that the Devtas would abandon Heaven, and run to hide, when 
they heard his neighing. Now, the day after tomorrow, I will see the 
wrestlers Chanur* and Mushtik, and the elephant Kuvalayapeeda, and even 
Kansa, killed at Your hands" - 



253 



Chaanooram mushtikam chaiva mallaananyaanshcha hastinam, 
Kansam cha nihatam drakshye^ parashvohani te^ vibho. 
10.37.16. 

Naradji also named the other demons who would be killed by Shri Krishna. 
Not only that, he spoke of all Shri Krishna would do - years later - at 
Dwarka*. Then he took his leave, and departed. 

No one should be surprised at Naradji' s predictions, since he is 
'trikaaladarshi'*. He has the knowledge of the past, present and future. 
After Naradji left, Shri Krishna returned to His routine of looking after the 
cattle, along with His friends. He continued to spread the supreme bliss to 
the Vrajavasis, by His various antics. One day, He was playing Hide and 
Seek, when Vyomasura* came in the form of a gwaal baal. He was skilled in 
the art of creating illusions. In the course of the game, he would kidnap the 
cowherd boys and hide them in a cave. When Shri Krishna saw that His 
playmates were reducing in number, He understood what Vyomasura was up 
to. He pounced on the demon, and throttled him to death. Then He released 
the imprisoned gwaal baals from the cave. 

When Kansa heard that both Keshi and Vyomasura had been killed, he 
prepared a scheme to invite Balaram and Shri Krishna to Mathura. The 
excuse he made was to organize a 'Dhanush Yagya'*. He met Akruraji* 
with a great display of affection, catching Akruraji 's hands warmly, and 
said, "You have been a great friend of mine. Go to Vraja, and bring my 
enemies Balaram-Krishna, to Mathura. I want to have them killed by the 
elephant Kuvalayapeeda. Chanur and Mushtik will kill them, in case they 
escape from the elephant. This earth will then be free of all obstacles, 
whatsoever, and you and I shall be able to rule with impunity." 
Akruraji replied, "Your scheme is excellent, but who knows what lies ahead. 
However, I will do as you say." 

How could the Lord Shri Krishna have come to Mathura, had Kansa sent 
someone cruel to bring Him? Krura* means one who is violent, and Akrura 
is the person who does not even have a hint of violence. It is only 
compassion which brings the Lord. He is pleased with a pure heart and 
straightforwardness. The Lord is never pleased with a crooked mind. 
When Akrura got onto his chariot, and set off for Vraja, the thought came to 
him, "Oh, today I will actually see the Lord Rama-Krishna! I will jump 
down from the chariot as soon as I catch sight of them, and will roll at their 
feet. Then the Lord will place His lotus-like hand on my head, and welcome 
me." 



254 



Lost in such thoughts, Akrura forgot which road he should take. He started 
from Mathura in the morning, but reached in the evening, even though his 
was a fast chariot. What can be done, if the one who drives loses his way? 
Akrura saw Balaram-Krishna as soon as he reached Vraja. Both brothers 
were seated at the place where the cows were milked. As soon as he caught 
sight of them, Akrura jumped down as planned, and began to roll at their 
feet. His eyes were full of tears, his body shivered, and his heart overflowed 
with love. He experienced deep joy. 

The Lord Shri Krishna lifted Akrura up, and embraced him. Balaramji also 
embraced him, and then both brothers took him by the hand and lead him to 
their house. 

When they reached home, Nandababa welcome Akrura warmly. After the 
polite, preliminary enquiries were over, a cow was brought, and made to 
stand before Akrura. This is a gesture of welcome, indicating that all the 
milk, curd, and ghee of the cow is for the use of the guest. Offering a cow is 
an essential part of welcoming a guest. After this, they massaged Akrura' s 
legs, to reduce his fatigue, and he was served a tasty meal. 

Nive ^dya gaam chaatithaye " samvaahya shraantamaadritah, 
Annam bahugunam me ^dhyam shraddhayopaaharad vibhuh. 
10.38.39. 

Thus, when all the formalities of welcome and proper service were 
completed, and all the others had wandered off, then Rama-Krishna came to 
Akrura. Akrura explained everything to them. At first, Rama-Krishna started 
laughing, but then they said, "Uncle, don't let anyone know about all this. 
Just tell everyone that a Dhanush Yagya, and wrestling matches are being 
held at Mathura. Kansa has invited all of you to come and see it." Akrura 
accepted their suggestion. Nandababa had it announced to the whole village 
that they were to leave for Mathura the next morning, taking milk, curds and 
ghee with them. 

When the Gopis heard that Rama-Krishna were to go to Mathura, they were 
filled with anguish. They had never before been separated from the two 
brothers. They began to blame the Vidhata*, "God, You are merciless. First 
You allow us to meet, but then You separate us before our hopes and 
aspirations have been fulfilled. This play of Yours is like a child's game." 

3# femidWcl H cf#E|^^7T 



255 



Aho vidhaatastava na kvachid dayaa 
Samyojya maitryaa pranaye^na de^hinah, 
Taanshchakritaarthaan viyunankshyapaarthakam 
Vikreeditam te Vbhakache ^shtitam yathaa. 
10. 39. 19. 

The Gopis further said, "Oh, God, we know that Akrura is not to be blamed 
for the turn of events - it is Your cruelty. It is You, who have come in the 
form of Akrura, and are snatching away the eyes which You gave to us. You 
should not do this." 

fTWfTMWir W ^TSrfi" ^tT F# sidled I 

Kroorastvamakroorasamaakhyayaa sma nashchakshurhi dattam harase^ 
bataagyavat, 

Ye ^naikade ^she ^khilasargasaushthavam tvadeeyamadraaksham vayam 

madhudvishah. 

10. 39. 21. 

Lamenting in this manner, the Gopis became deeply agitated by just the 
prospect of being separated from Shri Krishna. They began to weep, calling 
out, "Oh, Govind! Oh, Damodar! Oh, Madhav!" They wept all through the 
night. 

The following morning, Akrura completed his routine ablutions, and 
harnessed the horses. Balaram-Krishna left Yashoda Maiya, and other Gopis 
- all weeping profusely - as though setting off to watch some spectacle. 
Nandababa and his retinue got into their carts, laden with milk, curds, ghee, 
etc. However how could the carts keep up with a chariot? The chariot sped 
towards the Yamuna, while the carts moved in the direction of Mathura. 
During the journey, it occurred to Akrura that he may be doing something 
very sinful by conveying these two boys to the killer Kansa. The Lord 
sensed Akrura's feelings. So, when Akruraji stationed the chariot on the 
river bank, and went to bathe in the Yamuna, the Lord granted him a vision. 
Akrura saw the Narayana form of the Lord, sleeping on the serpent, inside 
the waters of the Yamuna. Eulogizing the Lord, Akrura said, "Lord, I am 
deluded with Your Maya, how do I recognize You? All the Shastras are for 



256 



worshipping You. You have undertaken several Avatars. The entire Creation 
is an illusion which exists within You." 

When Akrura emerged from the Yamuna, Shri Krishna asked him, "Uncle, 
why do you look so astonished? Did you see anything extraordinary?" 
Akrura said, "Sir - having seen You, what other sight can seem 
extraordinary?" 

When Rama-Krishna reached Mathura, after completing their baths, etc., 
they saw that Nandababa and his retinue had already reached, and set up the 
camp. Once there, Shri Krishna told Akrura, "Uncle, now you must go to 
Mathura." Akrura said, "Please, both of you, come to my home with me." 
Shri Krishna, however, replied, "No, Uncle. We will come to your house 
only after we have finished our work." 

Akrura departed unwillingly. He informed Kansa that Balaram-Krishna had 
arrived in Mathura, and then went to his own house. 

In the third pahar* of the following day, Shri Krishna entered the city, with 
Balaramji and a few gwaal baals. He saw the prosperity and beauty of 
Mathura - you may read the description in the Shrimad Bhagwat. Mathura 
was famous as a model city. 

When Balaram-Krishna entered Mathura, the first person they met was 
Kansa' s dhobi*. He was no ordinary washerman - he had hundreds of 
assistants, and carried the washed and unwashed clothes separately, on huge 
pack animals. 

Seeing the dhobi, Shri Krishna asked, "Give us the garments you have, 
which are likely to fit us." The man was blinded by self-importance. So far 
from offering the clothes, he began to berate the Lord. Shri Krishna did not 
really need the garments - His purpose was to create terror in Mathura. So, 
when the dhobi began to talk roughly, He gave the man such a slap that his 
head was severed from his body. The city was in an uproar, with people 
saying that the youngsters of Vraja are very bold and impudent. "When they 
behave thus with the dhobi, who knows how they'll behave with others?" 
Balaram-Krishna and the gwaal baals proceeded on their way, and entered - 
uninvited - the home of a gardener called Sudama. Sudama welcomed them 
with great warmth. Shri Krishna was pleased with him, and gave Sudama the 
boon that Laxmi would increase in his house. 

Now - see what the outcome of Shri Krishna's behavior so far, was. Kansa' s 
servants all came to fear him, but those involved in farming and gardening 
developed a partiality for Him. 

When they continued their walk, they met Kubja*. Shri Krishna called out, 
"Hey, you beauty!" 



257 



The Bhakti Shastra* calls this the Anugraha* of the Lord. Where is the 
godliness of God, if He doesn't show Grace to the jeeva? If He were to be 
attained only by the pure-hearted seekers, what could the impure, fallen 
sinners do, to reach Him? Of what use would the Lord's name, 
'Karunavarunalaya'* be, if there was no compassion in the Lord's heart, for 
such people? 

That is why Shri Krishna called out, "You beauty", to Kubja, and then went 
up to her. He would not have gone to her, had He been the nirguna Brahman. 
Because, to achieve an experience of the nirguna Brahma, it is the jeeva who 
has to develop the four qualities called Sadhan Chatushtaya of spiritual 
importance, and then shatter the veil of nescience, through his own efforts. 
Kubja was 'trivakra'* - meaning, physically crooked in three places. Some 
people give a spiritual interpretation, saying that she was the Kundalini 
Shakti*, but I refer to her as a historical figure. She was on her way to 
Kansa, carrying sandal paste and scented oils for his massage. She had not 
even looked at Shri Krishna. However, she was completely enchanted when 
He called out, addressing her as "You beauty!" 

Shri Krishna said, "Beautiful lady, give us the sandal paste and scented oils 
you have. It will benefit you." 

Kubja said, "Great Sir, where will I find anyone better suited for these items, 

than the two of you? Please take as much as you want." 

Both brothers, Rama-Krishna, accepted the ointments. Shri Krishna was 

pleased. He pressed both her feet with His own, held her chin, and jerked her 

up. Her body stood straight and tall. As it is, she had a lovely face. When her 

body lost its ugly humps, she became beautiful in every aspect. 

Seeing this - or hearing about it - the women in Mathura began to say, 

"Why do we need to go to a beauty parlor? We will all adore this boy! 

Because, he can turn even the ugly, into the beautiful, in a flash." At least 

half of Mathura' s population would have been female, and all the ladies 

became favorable towards Shri Krishna. 

After this, the Kripamurti* Shri Krishna reached the site of the Dhanush 
Yagya, accompanied by Balaramji. Shri Krishna broke the Dhanush of 
worship, and - when the guards came to attack - left for their camp. Back at 
the camp, He had a good meal of kheer*, and went peacefully to sleep. 
But Kansa, when he heard all this, could get no sleep. Whether awake or 
sleeping, he would see inauspicious signs everywhere. He was mortally 
afraid of the impending death. 

Even so, Kansa did not give up his wicked plans. He had the arena prepared 
the next morning, and had the elephant Kuvalayapeeda - whose strength 



258 



shook the earth - stationed at the entrance. He also ordered Chanur and 
Mushtik to remain alert. 

Balaram-Krishna had prior knowledge of Kansa's wicked plans. They 
walked confidently towards the arena, and killed Kuvalayapeeda. They tore 
off his tusks, placing one each on their shoulders, and reached the arena with 
the elephant's blood spattered on their bodies. 

Inside the arena, each person present saw Balaram and Shri Krishna 
according to their feelings towards them - ^n^t t# "*ttcRT spj *rdcT fcH 
cteft 'jaakee rahee bhaavanaa jaisee, prabhu moorati de^khee tina taisi'. The 
ladies saw them as Kama, Kansa and his group saw them as Death, and 
those learned in scriptures saw them as the Virat form of Shri Krishna. 
Ordinary people felt as though the nine Rasas had manifested as humans. 
The wrestling match commenced, in which Chanur, Mushtik, and the other 
wrestlers were all killed. The people of Mathura were fascinated by Shri 
Krishna's courage, and sided emotionally with Him. 

But Kansa, seated on his throne on a high platform along with his warriors, 
was furious. He began to babble angrily, "Catch these two boys! Kill them!" 
Just then, Shri Krishna jumped nimbly onto the platform. Kansa stood up, 
unsheathing his sword. Shri Krishna, however, needed no weapons. He had 
never used any weapon in Vraja, to kill the demons. He had sucked the life 
out of Putana, throttled the hurricane, and torn Bakasura apart with His bare 
hands. He had, thus, never needed a weapon. He caught the plait of Kansa's 
hair, and gave him such a shove that Kansa fell off the platform. Shri 
Krishna also jumped down, and sat astride his chest. Kansa was so 
frightened that he died of heart failure. Shri Krishna did not even box, slap 
or kick him. The very fear was enough to accelerate his heartbeats enough to 
cause his death 

After this, Shri Krishna advised everybody to carry out Kansa's last rites. He 
then went to Devki-Vasudev, and got them released from prison. Devki- 
Vasudev remembered the four-armed vision of the new-born Shri Krishna. 
They thought, "Oh - this is the four-armed Lord," and refrained form 
embracing Him. 

Shri Krishna said, "Father, Mother, I am guilty of neglecting to serve you. 
The son, who, despite being able, does not serve his parents, can never 
receive good fortune. The wicked Kansa harassed you a great deal, but My 
constraints rendered Me incapable of helping you." 

Vasudev-Devki's hearts were filled with emotion, when they heard these 
words. They made Balaram-Krishna sit on their laps, and their tears 
sprinkled the heads of the brothers. Their throats were choked with emotion, 
and they were unable to say anything. 



259 



After meeting His parents, Shri Krishna went to release Ugrasena from 
prison. He reinstated Ugrasena on the throne, and said, "Henceforth, you are 
our King. We are your servants. No one can cause you harm, any more. We 
stand behind you, to obey your every command." 

The people of Mathura were so delighted when Shri Krishna reinstated 
Ugrasena as King, that the old felt young again. Nobody felt unwell, or 
unhappy, or lacking in anything. The grandeur and appeal of Mathura was 
enhanced. Prosperity spread all over. Actually, where the Lord - who is 
Laxmipati* - is present, how can there be any dearth of beauty or wealth? 
Then, Shri Krishna went with Balaramji, to Nandababa's camp. He 
embraced Nandababa, and spoke privately to him. He said, 'Baba, it is you, 
who is My true Father, because it is you who have brought Me up. I now 
request you to return to Vraja. I know that My absence will cause you much 
suffering, but it is essential to bring happiness to our people in Mathura. 
After this is done, I will come to meet you." 

Hearing these words, Nandababa felt as though he had been struck by a 
thunderbolt. He was quite unable to speak. He swallowed his tears silently. 
He readied his carts, and returned to Vraja with the Gopas. 
Yashoda Maiya understood everything, when she saw that Balaram-Krishna 
had not returned with the others. "Why didn't your spirit leave your body, 
when you left our sons at Mathura?" she asked Nandababa. 
Nandababa said, "Dear, you speak the truth. I should have died there. But, 
just think! How terrible our Lala would have felt, had I died there! Now, we 
will slowly die of sorrow, till we see him again. We will live, while dying, 
and die while we live; but we will not let Lala know anything, which will 
cause him pain. What sort of a lover is he, who refuses to bear pain, but 
inflicts it on the one he loves?" 

When Vasudev-Devki regained normalcy, they organized the Yagyopaveet 
Sanskar of Balaram-Krishna. They also donated ten thousand cows, as per 
the pledge they had taken, when Shri Krishna was born. 
Apart from this, Vasudevji sent Balaram-Krishna to Sandeepani Muni's 
Ashram in Ujjain, for education and initiation. The brothers lead a 
disciplined life and studied hard. Within a short period of time, they had 
learnt all the different sciences. When the time came, for them to return to 
their homes, they went to their Teacher, asking respectfully, "What Guru 
Dakshinaa* can we give?" The Guru had come to know of the exceptional 
prowess and fame of the brothers. After discussing the matter with his wife, 
he said, "Our son had drowned in the sea, in the Prabhaas region. Please 
bring him back to us." 



260 



As per his command, Balaram-Krishna brought the son back from 
Yamaloka. The son stood before his parents. Balaram-Krishna again asked 
the Guru if he wanted anything else. 

Guruji said, "My sons, what greater Guru Dakshina can there be, than this? 
Which desire of a Guru - who has students like you, Purushottam* - can 
remain unfulfilled? Now, go to Your home. May Your fame be such as to 
purify all who hear about You. May You never forget anything You have 
learnt." 

Rama-Krishna returned to Mathura, after receiving the instructions and 
blessings of their Guru. The people felt supremely joyful to see them again, 
after a long period. 

Now comes Uddhav's visit to Vraja. Shri Shukadevji Maharaj introduces 
Uddhavji with these words - 

Vrishneenaam pravaro mantree krishnasya dayitah sakhaa, 
Shishyo vrihaspate^ saakshaaduddhavo buddhisattamah. 
10. 46. 1. 

"Parikshit, Uddhavji was the best of the Vrishni lineage. He was the direct 
student of Vrihaspati, and was highly intelligent. What could reveal more 
about his greatness, than the fact that he was a close associate and adviser of 
Shri Krishna?" 

In the Harivansha Purana, it is written that Vasudevji had a brother called 
Devbhag*. Uddhavji was his son, so he was also a cousin of Shri Krishna. 
According to the Mahabharata, Uddhavji 's name in the lineage records, was 
Vrihadbal. 

Grammatically, the meaning of the word 'Uddhav" is - 3cf>^ "mf 
'utkrishto dhavo yasya '. The one whose Lord is the best, is the form used on 
special occasions, is the best for worship, and is a mobile form of divinity - 
is called 'Uddhav'. 

One day, when they were alone, Shri Krishna told Uddhavji to go to Vraja. 
"My parents, the Gopa-Gopis, and gwaal baals, are all full of sorrow at 
being parted form Me," He explained. "Go and remove their sorrow." 
Uddhavji was delighted to be granted an opportunity to render some service. 
He went to Vraja, and saw that the place seemed to be filled with happiness. 
Every home had the worship of Devtas and ancestors. The ritual fire worship 
also prevailed in every home, and all appeared to be well and happy. The 
cows and calves were fine, and the Gopis were singing. Then - who was 



261 



troubled by Shri Krishna's absence? The fact was that every heart held the 
hope of Shri Krishna's return. "Who knows when He will suddenly arrive? 
He will be filled with sorrow, if He sees that the cows aren't healthy, or that 
the houses haven't been cleaned, or the Gopis are not dressed up." So, 
everyone pretended to be happy, so that Shri Krishna would be happy. 
However, every heart burnt with the fire of viraha*. 

Nandababa was very happy to meet Uddhavji. He felt as though Shri 
Krishna had come home. He fed Uddhavji affectionately, and made him rest, 
and asked how Shri Krishna was, describing His Leelas. Yashoda Maiya 
also sat near them, but did not say a word. Tears of love rolled down her 
cheeks, and milk flowed from her breasts, as she looked back at each Leela 
of Shri Krishna. 

Yashodaa varnyamaanaani putrasya charitaani cha, 
Shrunvantyashroonyavaasraaksheet sne ^hasnutapayodharaa. 
10. 46. 28. 

Uddhavji was enchanted to see the love of Nanda- Yashoda for Shri Krishna. 
He said, "Nanda- Yashoda Maiya, you are both blessed, to have such filial 
love for Shri Krishna - who is Lord Narayan, Himself! But, do not grieve. If 
you reflect, you will see that Shri Krishna is with you. For Him, nobody is 
either dear, or non-dear. He has equal goodwill for all." 

Drishtam shrutam bhootabhavadbhavishyat 

sthaasnushcharishnurmahadalpakam cha, 

Vinaachyutaad vastu taraam na vaachyam sa e\a sarvam 
paramaarthabhootah. 
10. 46. 43. 

Uddhavji said, "Nandababa and Yashoda, whatever is seen and heard; 
whatever has happened, is happening, and will happen; all that is inanimate 
and animate, big and small, is not separate from Shri Krishna. Everything is 
Shri Krishna Himself. Shri Krishna is the Atma of every Atma." 
Uddhavji spoke in this way, all night long. Next morning, he met the Gopis, 
who taunted him liberally. Then, when they met him in solitude, one of them 
became so engrossed in the Lord, that she believed a passing bee to be Shri 



262 



Krishna's envoy. She began to speak to it. This came to be called the 
Bhramar Geet*. Nandadas, Surdas, and other poets have elaborated upon it 
at length. The description in the Bhagwat is in the Maalinee meter, and is 
very beautiful - 

Madhupa kitavabandho maa sprishaanghri sapatnyaah 
Kuchavilulitamaalaakunkumashmashrubhirnah, 
Vahatu madhupatistanmaanineenaam prasaadam 
Yadusadasi vidambyam yasya dootastvameedrik. 
10. 47. 12. 

The Gopis said, "Oh, you friend of the Deceiver! Don't frolic before me! 
Don't try to cajole me, or make excuses. You have no love, yourself, for 
anyone - you just flit here and there - 

Sakridadharasudhaam svaam mohineem paayayitvaa 
Sumanasa iva sadyastatyaje ^smaan bhavaadrik, 
Paricharati katham tatpaadapadmam tu padmaa 
Hyapi vata hritache ^taa uttamashlokajalpaih. 
10. 47. 13. 

Oh, Bee - He has the same habit as you have, of drinking the nectar of a 
flower, and then going off elsewhere. He did, indeed, give us the taste of His 
nectar, just once. Oh, dear! How simple Laxmi is, to serve His feet with such 
devotion! She must be carried away by His sweet smooth-talk. 

Yadanucharitaleelaakarnapeeyushaviprut- 



263 



Sakridadanavidhoota dvandvadharmaa vinashtaah, 
Sapadi grihakutumbam deenamutsrijya deenaa 
Bahava iva vihangaa bhikshucharyaam charanti. 
10. 47. 18. 

Oh, Bee, people abandon their homes, when they listen to talks about Him. 
Their parents continue to weep disconsolately, and so do their wives. But 
those who leave everything for Him, turn into beggars, and live as the birds 
and animals, under the shelter of trees." 

The Bramar Geet has ten such Shlokas. The verses contain Prem*, Pranay*, 
Sneh*, Mana*, Anurag*, Bhava*, Mahabhava*, Adhiroodha*, Maadan*, 
and Modan*. Shree Roopa Goswami has analyzed ten signs of behavior, like 
sanjalpa*, vijalpa*, and chitrajalpa*, in these ten shlokas. In chitrajalpa, the 
Gopis speak erratically about their beloved. 

Uddhavji was entranced to see the depth of the Gopis' feelings. He began to 
say, "Gopis, you are blessed, and blessed is the love you feel. In this world, 
people try to develop Bhakti for the Lord, by giving alms, undertaking vrat, 
tapa, and other efforts for spiritual progress. This Bhakti is not given easily 
even to the Rishi-Munis. You, however, have not only procured the supreme 
Prem-Bhakti*, you have also established the ideal of devotion." 

■qf^r: yoiiddi f^TT g^krafq ^farri i 

Daanavratatapohoma -japasvaadhyayasanyamaih, 
Shre yobhirvividhashchaanyaih krishne " bhaktirhi saadhyate \ 
Bhagavatyuttamashloke " bhavatateebhiranultamaa, 
Bhaktih pravartitaa dishtyaa muneenaamapi durlabhaa. 
10.47. 24-25. 

Uddhavji then gave the Gopis the message sent by Shri Krishna. The Gopis 
were delighted to receive this. Uddhavji stayed in Vraja for many days, 
listening to talk about Shri Krishna. He saw each and every place where Shri 
Krishna had done some Leela. Ultimately, he was so overcome by his 
emotions that these words rose up - 



264 



Aasaamaho charanare ^nujushaamaham syaam 
Vrindaavane " kimapi gulmalatauvadheenaam, 
Yaa dustyajam svajanamaaryapatham cha hitvaa 
Bhe jurmukundapadaveem shrutibhirvimrigyaam. 
10. 47. 61. 

"The best thing for me would be to turn into some shrub, vine, or plant - 
here, in Vrindavan - so that the dust of the feet of the Gopis may continue to 
fall on me." 

It was extremely hard for the Gopis to leave their relatives, and the 
principals of propriety. They were far from being headstrong or selfish. Nor 
did they lack love for their families. Indeed, they had a deep affection for 
their families. They lived pure and decent lives. Despite this, they gave up 
social norms - not easy to give up - because of their love for Shri Krishna. 
So much so, that they ceased to care about even worldly ethics, other- 
worldly merit, their own bodies, and their self- interest, and comfort. Blessed 
indeed are the Gopis. 

What a great achievement it was, that the Gopis could serve the foot-prints 
of the Lord - who is sought even by the Shrutis. How great was their good 
fortune! 

You see, the Shrutis ascertain the desirability of an object through the 
predominance of the Atma. We do not love someone in order to bring 
fulfillment to them; we love for the sake of fulfilling our own Atma. 
Here, however, the Gopis love their bodies, because the bodies belong to 
Shri Krishna. The love of the Gopis is such that it contains no whiff of 
vanity. Their condition is such that they are unaware of the external world. 
They have become one with Shri Krishna. Their love has been assimilated - 
not made into a topic for mere discussions. They do not even feel that they 
love. They place the vessel of curds on their heads, and go around calling 
out, "Buy Gopal! Take Gopal!" They have become absolute affection, 
personified - 

Gvaalinee pragatayo poorana ne ^hu, 
Dadhibhaajana sirapara liye^ kahati gupaalhi le^hu. 



265 



Ultimately, when Uddhavji started on his journey back to Mathura, 
Nandababa and the other Gopas gave many gifts for him, to take back. They 
told him - 

H^'MMftrkW TM: f^T i*&t I I *o.YV9.^9. 

Karmabhirbhramyamaanaanaam yatra kvaapeeshvare ^cchayaa, 
Mangalaacharitairdaanai ratirnah krishna eeshvare \ 
10.47. 67. 

"Uddhavji, we do not know who is the Ishwara of others, or what He is like 
- saguna, nirguna, nirakar or sakar. Let those who know, know it. Our 
Ishwara is Shri Krishna, so we desire only that our minds be filled with 
Him." 

Back at Mathura, Uddhavji distributed all the gifts sent by the Vrajavaasis, 
but did not dare to place any before Shri Krishna. Of what value are material 
objects, in comparison to the love of the Vrajavaasis? Why speak of the men 
and women of Vraja - even the trees were turned towards the path to 
Mathura, in the hope that they would see Shri Krishna return. Even the vines 
would ooze honey in the hope that Shri Krishna would come and partake it. 
The eyes of the cows were focused on the road to Mathura, waiting for Him 
to come and pat them, and look after them. 

"Sir, You are extremely hard!" Uddhavji told Shri Krishna. "I have been to 

Vraja, and seen for myself, and felt in the depth of my heart, how deep their 

love for You is. And still, You left them and came here?" 

Shri Krishna showed Uddhavji, "See, just as the Gopis meditate upon Me, 

and think constantly of Me, in the same way, My whole body is filled with 

the Gopis — TtT TtT ^rfcT 'ilfWi 'roma roma prati gopikaa '. " 

A few days later, the Lord Shri Krishna took Uddhavji with Him, and went 

to Kubja's home. She accorded Him a very warm welcome. The Lord 

granted her what she desired, and returned home with Uddhavji. 

Some time later, The Lord went to Akruraji's house, accompanied by 

Balaramji and Uddhavji. Akruraji came foreword to welcome them. He 

folded his hands respectfully to both brothers, and then they bowed down to 

him. Akruraji asked Rama and Krishna to sit on the best seats. He did the 

ritual worship and eulogized them. "You coming to my house has made it a 

blessed place," he said. 

The Lord Shri Krishna said, "Uncle, please go to Hastinapur once, and stay 
there for a few days. I want you to bring back the news of our well-wishers, 



266 



the Pandavas. When I get their news form you, I will make suitable 
arrangements for their comfort and wellbeing." 

As commissioned by the Lord, Akruraji went to Hastinapur. He stayed there 
for a number of days, and found out what the situation was, of both the 
Kauravas and the Pandavas. He came to know of the many injustices 
inflicted by the Kauravas upon the Pandavas. Kunti, the mother of the 
Pandavas, began to cry, when Akruraji visited her. 'Akruraji, I am so 
unhappy, to be surrounded by enemies," she said. "My condition is like a 
doe trapped between a herd of wolves. My sons are fatherless. Will it ever 
happen that our Shri Krishna will come here, and give solace to my 
orphaned children?" 

Saying this, Kunti felt as though Shri Krishna stood before her. She began to 
talk to Him, "Oh, Shri Krishna! You are the personification of the 
Sacchidananda*. You are the Mahayoga*. You are the Vishwatma*. You are 
the one who gives life to all. Oh, Govind! I face sorrows, one after another. I 
have surrendered to You. Protect me! Save my children!" 

Krishna krishna mahaayogin vishvaatman vishvabhaavan, 
Prapannaam paahi govinda shishubhishchaavaseedateem. 
10. 49. 11. 

Akruraji tried to console Kunti, saying, "Please do not worry. Your sons are 
born to destroy all that is irreligious. I will give all your news to Shri 
Krishna." 

Just before departing for Mathura, Akruraji went to meet Dhritarashtra. 
"Sir," he said, "Please enhance the fame and glory of the Kuru Vansha*. 
You have become the King, due to the fact that your brother, Pandu, 
departed for Heaven. So, please be equal in your behavior to your sons and 
the Pandavas. Only then will you achieve a good name in this world, and 
obtain sadgati*. If your behavior is diametrical to that which is righteous, 
you will be criticized by all, and have to go to hell, when you die. This world 
is as transient as four moonlight nights. It is a game, played in a dream. So, 
control your mind's tendencies and save yourself from being partisan." 
King Dhritarashtra replied, "Akruraji, all you say is only for my good. 
However, your advice does not linger in my fickle mind for even one 
minute. I have heard that the All-powerful God has descended, to relieve the 
burden of the Earth. So, whatever He wishes, will happen." 



267 



Akruraji understood Dhritarashtra's indication. He took a fond farewell of 
the Kauravas and the Pandavas, and returned to Mathura. He gave Shri 
Krishna and Balaramji all the news in detail. 

Shri Shukadevji then began to describe the killing of Jarasandh, and the 
establishing of the city of Dwarka. "Parikshit," he said, "Kansa had two 
wives - one was called Asti and the other was called Prapti*." 

3}f^T: HlfkUM ^R^T ^R%^ft I %o.\o.%. 

Astih praaptishcha kansasya mahishau bharatarshabha. 10. 50. 1 

Now see, what is the spiritual interpretation of Asti-Prapti? 'Asti' means 'we 
have this much', and 'prapti' means 'we will get this much more'. The 
Gita's description is, ^HWknfa ?T ^fa^fa ^t^t ' idamasteedamapi te^ 
bhavishyati punardhanam '. 

Asti and Prapti were both Jarasandh's daughters. Jarasandh was made of two 
parts, joined to make one body. Since a demoness called 'Jara' had joined 
the two parts, he was given the name of Jarasandh. This is Dehadhyas. It is 
written in the Bhagwat, that Jarasandh is karmabandhan*. Vanity gets 
entangled with 'asti' and 'prapti', when a person gets attached to his work. 
So, Asti-Prapti both went to their father, Jarasandh, and told him how their 
husband had died. Jarasandh was furious when he heard the details. He 
attacked Mathura with an army of twenty three Akshauhinis. He attacked 
seventeen times, but each time he was defeated by Shri Krishna-Balaram. 
And why not - where Balramji's Yoga and Shri Krishna's Gnan prevails, 
what could Jarasandh 'a strength achieve? 

Jarasandh, however, was not alone. Kalyavan* came to Jarasandh's aid, 
when he was defeated. Kalyavan had been granted a boon that his enemy 
would have to flee before him. Shri Krishna knew this. So, He appointed 
Balaramji to defend Mathura, and came to face Kalyavan, and then began to 
flee. Kalyavan chased Him. They reached a place where Muchkund lay, fast 
asleep. Shri Krishna covered the sleeping Muchkund with His dupatta, and 
hid. Kalyavan mistook Muchkund for Shri Krishna, and gave him a kick. 
Muchkund woke up, and Kalyavan was turned into ashes, as soon as 
Muchkund' s gaze fell on him. Shri Krishna appeared before Muchkund, who 
recognized Him, and began to eulogize Him. Shri Krishna gave Muchkund 
the boon that in his next birth, he would become a Bhakta. Then, He 
returned to Mathura. 

Kalyavan 's army had surrounded Mathura, and Jarasandh was preparing to 
launch his eighteenth attack. So, Shri Krishna created the city of Dwarka, in 
the sea, after consulting Balaramji. He shifted His people there overnight. 



268 



Then the two brothers destroyed Kalyavan's army, and took away all his 
wealth. 

Just then, Jarasandh attacked Mathura for the eighteenth time. His twenty 
three Akshauhini army was like a sea at high tide. He looted the wealth 
which had been taken from Kalyavan's army. Impure wealth becomes a 
cause of unhappiness, so Shri Krishna let Jarasandh snatch away the wealth. 
Shri Krishna-Balaram could have defeated Jarasandh for the eighteenth time, 
but they decided that it was better to avoid more killing. They ran away, 
barefooted. Since that day, Shri Krishna was given the name of Ranchod*. 
During their escape, they took their meals at the Ashramas of Mahatmas, did 
Satsang, and ultimately reached Girinar mountain. Hot on the chase, 
Jarasandh also reached there. When both brothers reached the pinnacle of 
the Girinar, Jarasandh set fire to the mountain from all sides. Shri Krishna- 
Balaram, however, jumped off the mountain, and reached Dwarka. 
You see, my brother, whether it is Shri Krishna or Shri Rama, they also have 
to face favorable and unfavorable situations, when they take on a human 
form. The one who passes through with patient endurance, is a Mahapurush. 
Shri Krishna smiled through every situation. Circumstances did not affect 
Him. 

Balaramji's marriage was organized first, after things were settled at 
Dwarka. As per the dictates of the scriptures, the marriage of the elder 
brother should take place first. The bride was Revti*, the daughter of King 
Raivat of Aanarta. 

It is said that King Raivat went, with his daughter Revti, to Brahmaji, and 
said, "I will get my daughter married to the most superior man in your 
Creation." 

Brahmaji laughed, saying, "In the one minute which has passed here, several 
eons have passed on your world. Now, your kingdom is gone, and so is your 
lineage. You should go to Dwarka and get your daughter Revti married to 
Balaramji." 

Regarding this episode, preachers say that Revti - being a girl from the 
Satya Yuga, was very all. Balaramji was from the Dvapar Yoga, so he was 
much shorter than Revti. It became a problem that how can a tall girl marry 
a short man? Balaramji said, "It is not a difficult problem. I will set things 
right." He picked up his plough, and placed it on Revti 's shoulder, and 
pulled till she was shortened to his height. This tale, however, is only to 
make people laugh. It is nowhere written in the Shrimad Bhagwat. 
After Balaramji got married to Revti, it was Shri Krishna's turn to get 
married. The first marriage was with Rukmini, the daughter of King 
Bhishmak of Kundinpur. 'Bhishmak' means 'a terrifying ocean'. Rukmini 



269 



was also the golden Laxmi, which is why she came as Bhishmak's daughter. 
Venom was the first to emerge from the ocean. 

Rukmi did not want his sister Rukmini to marry Shri Krishna, but Rukmini 
wanted none other than Krishna. She had heard high praises of Shri 
Krishna's greatness; of His beauty and sweetness, and she was enchanted by 
all she had heard. 

When Rukmi finalized Rukmini 's marriage with Shishupal, she sent a 
trustworthy Brahmin to Shri Krishna with a message. As soon as the 
Brahmin entered, Shri Krishna got up from His seat, and made the Brahmin 
sit on it. He welcomed the Brahmin with the appropriate rituals of washing 
his hands and feet. Then, He asked, "Brahman Devta, you have undertaken a 
long journey to come here, so you must be having some service in mind, 
which I can render. I know very well that you would not have come for 
material wealth, because Brahmins are always and invariably contented. So, 
please tell me the reason for your visit." 

The Brahman Devta said, "Maharaj, Rukmini has sent You a proposal of 
marriage, and has said - 

cbu|rii^dls<j-'MNH I 

Shrutvaa gunaan bhuvanasundara shrinvataam te " 
Nirvishya karnavivarairharatongataapam, 
Roopam drishaam drishimataamakhilaarthalaabham 
Tvayyachyutaavishati chittamapatrapam me \ 
10. 52. 37. 

'Oh, Bhuvanabhushana* Shyamsundar, I have heard from people about 
Your qualities, Your good looks, beauty, sweetness, character, and nature. 
When a person hears about Your qualities, the qualities enter the heart 
through the passage of the ears, and then all the physical discomforts are 
quietened. I know that to anyone, who has eyes, the very sight of Your form 
bestows Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha. These are the four principal 
purusharthas for humans. A glimpse of You is Svaartha* and Paramartha*, 
and everything else. That is why my mind enters shamelessly into You. If I 
can not marry You in this birth, I will be reborn a hundred times, but I will 
definitely marry You, because I have presented my soul to You. 
Now, You must ensure that the jackal does not succeed in taking the lion's 
portion. So, please come before the marriage ceremony takes place. Come at 



270 



the time when I go to the temple of the Devi - as per the custom of my 
lineage - and kidnap me from there." 

Hearing all this, Shri Krishna said, "Brahman Devta, I am also in love with 
Rukmini. So much so, that I can't sleep at night. I know that Rukmi does not 
want Rukmini to marry Me, because he hates Me. However, you will see 
that I will soon scatter the enemies and get Rukmini out of their clutches." 

clWlft dR^Tll fast H ^ I 
HcM<IHHoiai^M«ratsiHfi»HsliHo| I I ^0.^.3-3. 

Tathaahamapi tacchitto nidraam cha na labhe " nishi, 
Ve ^daaham rukminyaa dve ^shaanmamodvaaho nivaaritah. 
Taamaanyishya unmathya raajanyaapasadaan mrighe \ 
Matparaamanavadyaangeeme ^dhasoagni - shikhaamiva. 
10.53.2-3. 

Shri Krishna did not consult anyone - neither His parents, nor Balaramji. He 
got onto the chariot, and went off towards Kundinpur with only the 
Brahmin! It did not take them long to reach. Nobody could discover whether 
Shri Krishna was there at the invitation of the Groom, or the Bride. 
Shishupal was the son of Shri Krishna's aunty, so many felt that He was 
with the Bridegroom's party. When Bhiskmak heard of Shri Krishna's 
arrival, he gave Him a warm welcome, and arranged for accommodation 
appropriate for Him. The citizens flocked to catch a glimpse of Shri Krishna. 
They began to say that it is He, who is suited to be Rukmini 's husband. She 
should be married to Shri Krishna. 

When Balaramji heard that Shri Krishna had set off alone for Kundinpur, he 
followed Him with his army. Even though he knew that nobody could harm 
Shri Krishna, he was aware that many wicked people were gathered there, 
who were capable of doing anything. "It is necessary for me to go there," 
thought Balaramji. When we love someone, it is natural to feel anxious 
about their safety. 

When the kings accompanying Shishupal heard of Shri Krishna's arrival, 
they became alert and watchful. They lined up, ready and fully armed, seated 
on their horses and elephants and chariots, lining both sides of the road by 
which Rukmini was to pass, to worship the Devi. Rukmini came on 
schedule, with her armed Guard. After washing her hands and feet, she 
worshipped the Devi, assisted by the ladies of the family. "Mother," prayed 



271 



Rukmini, "Please let me be married to Shri Krishna." She had been informed 
of Shri Krishna's arrival by the Brahmin. 

When Rukmini completed her worship and emerged from the temple, the 
Kings appointed to guard her swooned at the sight of her radiant beauty. 
They fell off their elephants and horses and chariots, and their weapons 
slipped from their hands. 

Just then Rukmini caught sight of Shri Krishna. She wanted to climb up on 
His chariot. Shri Krishna leaned forward and caught her hand. He lifted her 
onto the chariot, and went off, with Balaramji and the Yaduvanshis 
following. It was just like a lion taking his portion from in-between a pack of 
jackals, and going off. 

When the Kings regained their senses, they gathered their forces. 
Balaramji 's army attacked, and drove them back. However, Rukmini 's 
brother Rukmi, declared that he would avenge the kidnapping of his sister. 
"If I cannot bring my sister back, I will never enter this city again," he 
vowed. 

Having taken this vow, Rukmi reached Shri Krishna with his army. 
However, what could he do alone, when all the Kings accompanying him 
with their vast armies, were defeated and retreating? Shri Krishna fought for 
a while with Rukmi, then captured and disfigured him. He tied Rukmi up 
and put him on His chariot. Rukmini was distressed to see her brother in this 
condition. Just then, Balaramji reached them, after having defeated and 
scattered the enemy armies. He comforted Rukmini, set Rukmi free, and 
allowed him to return. True to his word, Rukmi did not go to Kundinpur. He 
established a city called Bhojkat, and began to live there. 
When Shri Krishna reached Dwarka with Rukmini, He invited all their 
relatives and friends. Brahmins were invited and asked to conduct the proper 
ritual of marriage for Shri Krishna and Rukmini. 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj narrated to Parikshit, that after the Lord Rudra* 
had burnt Kama to ashes, Kama's wife, Rati, had prayed to him. Lord Rudra 
granted Rati a boon that her husband would be born as the son of the Lord 
Vasudev. 

It was the same Kamadev, who was born as the son of Shri Krishna and 
Rukmini, and was given the name of Pradyumna. Pradyumna was not even 
ten days old, when he was kidnapped by a demon called Shambarasura*, 
from the delivery room. The demon threw the baby into the sea, and returned 
to his own home. He had come to know that Pradyumna would be his enemy 
in future. 

A huge fish swallowed Pradyumna. The fish was caught by a fisherman, and 
presented to Shambarasura. When the cook cut the fish open, he found the 



272 



beautiful baby still alive. A lady servant of Shambarasura, called Mayavati, 
took the baby and began to bring him up. 

Mayavati was not other than Kama's wife, Rati. She had changed her name 
and form, to work in Shambasura's house, awaiting the rebirth of her 
husband. Naradji had informed her that her husband had been born as the 
baby Pradyumna. 

So, Rati - in the name of Mayavati - loved Pradyumna deeply. Soon 
Pradyumna became a young man. He was so handsome that women were 
infatuated as soon as they saw him. Even Mayavati - actually Rati - 
changed in her attitude towards him. 

Pradyumna understood her hints. "You are like my Mother," he told her. 
"How is it that your feelings have changed?" 

Rati disclosed the whole story about herself, and his past. "My Lord," she 
said, "Your Mother is extremely distressed since you got lost. It is very 
important that you reach Dwarka. However, we can not escape while this 
extremely strong demon, Shambar, lives. So, please destroy him." 
Mayavati Rati taught Pradyumna a technique called 'Maha Maya", which 
Pradyumna employed to kill Shambarasura. 

The Rati took her husband, and flew to Dwarka. Both of them appeared 
extremely beautiful there. The people were fascinated by the beauty of this 
couple. Apart from Shri Krishna, nobody could recognize them. Shri 
Krishna did not think that it was proper for Him to reveal their background. 
Ultimately Naradji arrived, and told everybody who Pradyumna and Rati 
really were. People's happiness knew no bounds. Pradyumna began to live at 
Dwarka with his wife, Rati. 

After getting married to Rukmini, Shri Krishna got married to Jambavati* 
and Satyabhama*. These two marriages are connected in the episode of the 
Syamantak Mani*. The Shrimad Bhagwat contains the description of these 
marriages, but before narrating that, I want to tell you about a little play, 
called "Lalita-Madhav", by Shri Roop Goswami. 

According to this play, when Shri Krishna left Vraja and went to Dwarka, 
the Gopis fainted with the sorrow of separation. Vrishabhanu* took his 
unconscious daughter, Radha*, to heaven. When she could not regain 
consciousness even there, she took on the form of Satyabhama, and forgot 
the past. Then Satrajit* - who worshipped the Sun - took her as his daughter, 
and got her married to Shri Krishna. 

In the same way, Radha' s friend, Lalita, was unable to bear the pangs of 
separation. She jumped from a mountain top, to end her life. Jambavan*, 
who stood below, saved her and adopted her. He called her Jamabavati, and 
got her married to Shri Krishna. 



273 



These are all different stories, and playwrights have the right to narrate 

them. Now, listen to the version of the Shrimad Bhagwat. 

Satrajit, who lived in Dwarka, was a great devotee of the Sun, so the Sun 

presented him with a Mani. The Mani gave eight units (754 kilos) of gold 

every day. Shri Krishna told Satrajit, "Such a valuable item should be kept 

guarded as a National treasure. You should give it to King Ugrasen." Satrajit 

refused to take His advice, and gave the Mani to his brother, Prasen. 

One day, Prasen rode out hunting, wearing the Mani. Both Prasen and his 

horse were killed by a lion. Then Jambavan killed the lion and took the 

Mani. 

Thus, the Mani changed several hands. However, back at Dwarka, Shri 
Krishna's reputation was marred by a rumor that He had stolen the Mani. It 
is seen, here, how innocent people are blamed unfairly. When even Shri 
Krishna faced slander, how can anyone hope to escape it? 
The Lord Shri Krishna began to take steps to clear His name. He searched 
till He reached Jambavan's cave. A number of highly respected citizens 
were with Him. Shri Krishna told them to wait outside, and entered the cave 
alone. 

Inside the cave, there was a confrontation between Jambavan and Shri 
Krishna. They wrestled fiercely for twenty eight days. Ultimately Jambavan 
recognized that this was the Lord Incarnate, and gave - not only the Mani - 
but also his daughter, Jambavati, to Shri Krishna. 

The people who had accompanied Shri Krishna, waited outside the cave for 
twelve days, and then returned dejected to Dwarka. The people of Dwarka 
were filled with anxiety for Shri Krishna. They began to curse Satrajit, and 
went to pray at the temple of the Devi Durga, for Shri Krishna's safe return. 
The Devi blessed them, and, at the same moment, Shri Krishna appeared 
there, with the Mani and the newly wed Jambavati. Dwarka was filled with 

joy. 

Shri Krishna summoned Satrajit, and gave him the Mani. Satrajit felt terribly 
ashamed. After thinking about the incident for some days, he got his 
daughter, Satyabhama, married to Shri Krishna, and presented the Mani to 
Him as well. Shri Krishna returned the Mani, saying, "Keep the Mani with 
you, but you may present the gold it produces, to Me." 
After this, Shri Krishna and Balaramji went to Hastinapur. While they were 
away, Shatadhanva* killed Satrajit and stole the Mani. Satyabhama was 
deeply distressed at the murder of her Father. She went to Hastinapur to 
inform Shri Krishna and Balaramji. They returned to Dwarka. Shatadhanva 
was frightened. He kept the Mani with Akrurji, and ran away with all 
possible speed. Shri Krishna and Balaram gave the chase. Shri Krishna 



274 



killed him just before they reached Mithila*, but the Mani was not found on 
Shatadhanva's body. Shri Krishna told Balaramji, but he was not, in his 
heart of hearts, able to believe Shri Krishna. He went off to meet the King of 
Mithila. 

Shri Krishna returned to Dwarka. He called Akrurji - who had also tried to 
run away in fear along with Kritavarma* - and said, "Uncle, I know that 
Shatadhanva has left the Mani with you. Although this is the rightful 
inheritance of My sons, you may keep it with you. There is, however, a 
problem, that My elder brother, Balaramji, does not believe Me, in the 
matter of the Mani - 

Kintu maamagrajah samyak na pratye ^ta manim prati. 

So, please show everybody this Mani, just once, to dispel all doubts." 
Akruraji took the Mani out from inside his clothes. It shone as brightly as the 
Sun. Akruraji gave the Mani to Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna held it up, for all 
present to see, and vindicated Himself. He then returned the gem to Akruraji. 
Shri Krishna's marriages to Kalindi*, Mitravinda*, Satya*, Bhadra*, and 
Laxmana* are described after this. Shortage of time does not permit detailed 
descriptions, but you can read them in the Shrimad Bhagwat. 
After the description of these marriages, comes the description of the rescue 
of the sixteen thousand maidens, who had been imprisoned by Bhaumasura. 
This materialistic demon was extremely cruel. He said that he would marry 
the girls when they totaled one hundred thousand. His arrangements for the 
security of his Capital, Pragjyotishpur, were excellent. It was extremely 
difficult to enter Bhaumasura' s fortress. Shri Krishna, however, used His 
Chakra to kill all the Sentries, and killed Bhaumasura, and liberated the 
sixteen thousand maidens he had imprisoned. 

What was to be done with the liberated maidens? In today's world, one 
cannot imagine the difficulties they faced. In those days, they would not 
have received shelter, and nor could they have got married. They would 
never be socially accepted. 

So, the Karunavarunalaya* Lord Shri Krishna - in keeping with His 
progressive ideas - took the revolutionary step of marrying them all. He 
brought them to Dwarka, as His Queens, and His lineage continued through 
them. 

Thus, by His action, Shri Krishna showed the society of that time, that 
helpless women should not be demeaned and discarded. They are absolutely 



275 



innocent and free of guilt. Some people question as to how Shri Krishna 
could have so many wives, but there is nothing, really, to be surprised at. 
You see, the Lord is a Chandra Vanshi. In the lunar calendar, there is the 
Amavasya*, and there is the Purnima*, and there are fourteen tithes, from 
the Pratipada* to the Chaturdashi*. Thus, the Moon has sixteen Kalas*. Like 
the Chandrama, Shri Krishna also has sixteen Kalas, and each Kala has 
thousands of divisions. It is the same with the tendencies of the mind. The 
fact is that Shri Krishna is the Lord of all the tendencies, of all the objects in 
the world, and the entire Creation. Considering this, if Shri Krishna is made 
the Lord of sixteen thousand wives, no one should be surprised. 
You must also realize that on the one hand, there were thousands of wives, 
and on the other hand, they each had countless modes of allurement. Despite 
all their allurements, however, they did not succeed in captivating Shri 
Krishna's heart. Nor could they cause any kind of attraction in His mind. 
That is because Shri Krishna is Atmaram*. He was completely free of all 
desire, when He frolicked with them. That is the reason why Shri Shukadevji 
said, later - 

Smaayaavalokalavadarshitabhavahaari 
Bhroomandalaprahitasauratamantrashaundaih, 
Patnyastu shodashasahasramanangabaanai 
Ryasye ^ndriyam vimathitum karanairnashe ^kuh. 
10. 61.4. 

One day, Rukmini showed a little pride. You will be amazed to hear the 
things Shri Krishna said to her that day. He said, "You see, Rukmini, I had 
abducted you to make My enemies lose face. That purpose is achieved. I do 
not have anything at all. I am nirguna, and nirdhan*. You made a great 
mistake by marrying Me. You may now go where you please, and marry 
whoever you wish." 

Hearing such words, Rukmini fell in a faint. She began to fall, but Shri 
Krishna reverted to His four- armed form, and lifted her up. He consoled her, 
comforted her, and asked, "You got upset at such a little joke? Oh, there is 
always much joking and teasing between couples, so you should enjoy this, 
instead of becoming sad. " 



276 



The Mahatmas explain this story by saying that Rukmini could not even 
imagine being separated from Shri Krishna. So, Shri Krishna spoke in a way 
which would give her the experience of verbal separation. 
Then comes the description of Shri Krishna's progeny. I will not go into it in 
detail. I just want to tell you that Rukmini 's son, Pradyumna's second 
marriage was arranged with the daughter of his uncle, Rukmi. Although 
Rukmi had not forgotten his humiliation, he allowed his daughter to marry 
Pradyumna, to please his sister, Rukmini. 

Pradyumna had a son called Aniruddha. Aniruddha's second marriage was 
arranged with Rukmi 's Granddaughter. During the wedding celebrations, 
Balaramji killed Rukmi in the course of a game of dice. It must be 
remembered here, how Balaramji had rebuked Shri Krishna angrily, when 
He had defeated, disfigured and bound Rukmi up, when He had abducted 
Rukmini. At that time, Balaramji had sided with Rukmi. Now, however, he 
was so angry to see Rukmi cheat at dice and laugh at him, that he killed 
Rukmi on even such a felicitous occasion. This proves how gambling 
becomes the cause of much evil and unhappiness. It also shows how 
circumstances can turn tragic due to a game of chance. 
Rukmini was very angry with Balaramji for killing her brother. Shri 
Krishna's home was filled with domestic strife. What was He to say? 
Balaramji would be upset, if He sided with Rukmini, and Rukmini would be 
upset if He sided with Balaramji. He remained silent. Remaining silent can 
put an end to a dispute, instead of fanning it. 

One day, Naradji came to Dwarka, and told Shri Krishna, "Maharaj, You 
have so many sons of different ages - does anyone keep track of them?" 
Shri Krishna asked him, "What is the matter, Sir? Has anyone misbehaved 
with you?" 

Naradji replied, "No, Sir, nobody has misbehaved. However, are You aware 
of the whereabouts of Your Grandson, for the past four months?" 
Shri Krishna asked, "Where is he? Truly, I have not seen him recently." 
Whereupon, Naradji told Shri Krishna the whole story, of how Usha, the 
daughter of Vanasura* had seen Aniruddha in her dream, and how her friend 
Chitralekha* had painted his picture for her, and kidnapped him, and taken 
him to Usha. Naradji also told Him that Aniruddha was with Usha, and was 
held captive by Vanasura. 

The news flashed all over Dwarka like lightning. The anger of the 
Yaduvanshis knew no bounds. They attacked Vanasura, under the leadership 
of Shri Krishna and Balaramji. 



277 



Vanasura was a great devotee of the Lord Shankar. The Lord Shankar had, 
one day, been very pleased with his deep devotion, and had offered him a 
boon. 

Vanasura replied, "Maharaj, my thousand arms have become a load on me. I 
can find no one to fight with. So, please have a battle with me." 
The Lord Shankar said, "You fool! You have developed a great vanity! Take 
this flag, and hoist it on your palace. The day it falls, you will know that the 
one, who will fight with you, has arrived." 

The flag fell off when the Yaduvanshis attacked Vanasura. Vanasura fought 
a terrible battle. Shankarji fought at his side, as well. However, the Lord Shri 
Krishna, Balaramji, and their army defeated them both. In the end Shri 
Krishna chopped off Vanasura' s arms, leaving just four, at the behest of 
Shankarji. 

Vanasura allowed Aniruddha to go free. He got his daughter Usha, married 
to Aniruddha, and gave many gifts and a huge dowry, when they left. Usha- 
Aniruddha lived in conjugal bliss at Dwarka. Shri Krishna and Balaramji 
also returned to Dwarka with their army. 
Tomorrow, I will tell you what happened next. 

Om Shantih Shantih Shantih 



278 



Pravarchan XII 
(Chapter X) 

How can one know for sure, which is the speech of God? The qualification 
is that what God says, is always for the benefit of all His children - whether 
the children have Satva Guna, Rajo Guna, or Tamo Guna! Just as a Father 
wants the best qualities in his son to surface, God, too, wants goodwill, 
awareness and joy to arise in everybody. So, when the words have the effect 
of giving rise to feelings of Sacchidananda* in the jeevas who are 
susceptible to these three tendencies, and the words are beneficial for all, 
then it is called the speech of the Lord. Any speech containing even a hint of 
partiality for any group, caste, religious sect; and any indication that only the 
believers of their sect will attain heaven, and everyone else will go to hell - 
then you can take it that they are not the words of God. Because, God desires 
the good of all His creatures, all his children. 

It is the speech of God, which has emerged in the form of the Shrimad 
Bhagwat, through the words of Narayana, Shiva, Shesha, Brahma, Narad, 
Vyas, Shukadev, and Sanakadi. The words apply not only to humans, but 
also to animals and birds, vines and shrubs, etc. It applies to all. So much so, 
that it is to the benefit of each and every creature which exists. 
The Yaduvanshi Princes were playing in the fields one day, when they saw a 
chameleon which had fallen into a well. All their efforts to rescue it failed. It 
was only when Shri Krishna came and touched it, that it turned into a Devta. 
After obtaining the form of a Devta, he explained that in his past life, he had 
been born in the Ikshavaku lineage, as King Nriga. "I donated an 
incalculable number of cows," he said. "So many, that if all the particles of 
dust, and all the stars in the sky, and all the raindrops which fall on earth 
could be counted, they would total to the number of cows donated by me." 

^farc^r dlcldl-Wi WIT: I I *o.V*.^. 
Yaavatyah sikataa bhoome ^ryaavatyo divi taaraakaah, 
Yaavatyo varshadhaaraashcha taavateeradadaam sma gaah. 
10. 64. 12 

Then he told them the cause of his becoming a chameleon. "Two Brahmins 
had a dispute with regard to a cow donated by me. They both claimed that I 
had donated the same cow to both. So, I was confused by the claim of the 



279 



two Brahmins. I wanted to buy the cow back from one of them, but neither 
agreed. They departed dissatisfied. 

I died at the end of my natural span of life. Yamaraj asked me which I 
preferred to accept first - the fruit of my sin, or the fruit of my meritorious 
deeds. I told him that I preferred to bear the fruit of my sin first. So, I had to 
become the chameleon." 

The Valmiki Ramayana's version is that when the two Brahmins began to 
argue about the ownership of the cow, and went to King Nriga for justice, 
the King delayed in replying. He would nod in agreement, to both Brahmins, 
as each staked his claim. The King died before giving justice, which is why 
he had to become a chameleon. 

This story proves two points. One is that according to our scriptures, an item 
can not be donated more than once. It is irreligious to use the same item 
twice, as a donation, and a human being has to suffer the consequences of 
his actions, if he does that. The second point is that a King should never 
delay in giving justice. 

Having attained a divine form, Nriga said, "Lord, by Your Grace, I am 
released form the birth I got as a result of my sin. Please grant me 
permission to go to the Devlok. Please bless me, that no matter where I go, 
my mind dwells constantly upon Your feet." 

Having eulogized and bowed to the Lord, King Nriga left for Heaven. Shri 
Krishna told His family members who were present, "You must never snatch 
away the wealth of a Brahmin. You must bow down to them as respectfully 
as I do. I will never pardon anyone who flouts this command of mine, or 
insults them", 

Yathaaham praname " vipraananukaalam samaahitah, 
Tathaa namata yuyam cha yonyathaa me " sa dandabhaak. 
10. 64. 42. 

After this episode comes Balaramji's visit to Vraja. He stayed there for two 
months, giving solace and comfort to Nandababa, Yashoda Maiya, and all 
the people of Vraja, as they were suffering with the burning agony of being 
separated form Shri Krishna. 

On one occasion, Balaramji called out to Yamunaji, but she pretended not to 
hear. He was angry, and prepared to break her up into little pieces, with his 
plough. Ultimately, when Yamunaji remembered Balaramji's tremendous 



280 



power, she asked him to forgive her. He forgave her, and then frolicked with 
the Gopis, in her limpid waters. 

Balaramji was still at Vraja, when Paundrak - a fast friend of the King of 
Kashi* - sent a message to Shri Krishna, claiming to be the original 
Vasudev. He had attached two artificial arms to his shoulders, and pretended 
to be four armed. Deceit, falsehood and pretense can never prevail with the 
Lord Shri Krishna. So, the Lord killed Paundrak, along with his friend, and 
they were uplifted. 

Sudakshin, the son of the King of Kashi, asked the Brahmins there to 
undertake an evil ritual to destroy Shri Krishna, and avenge the death of his 
father. The Lord's Sudarshan Chakra destroyed the priests involved in the 
ritual. Then the malevolent effects of the ritual turned onto Sudakshin, 
turning him and the Brahmins to ashes. 

How Balaramji - famous for his amazing feats - killed the troublesome 
monkey, Dvivid, is described next. The Adhyatmik meaning of 'dvivid' is 
dvi = two, vid = knowledge. A person having two kinds of knowledge, who 
stands neither on one side of the river bank, nor on the other, an undecided 
person, one who is fickle and filled with doubts, like a monkey. It is also 
called 'duvidhaa', meaning indecision or uncertainty. This tendency is 
harmful for everybody. So, Balaramji exerted himself to destroy it. 
Now the story comes to the incident when Samba, the son of Jambavati, was 
captured while returning to Dwarka. He had gone to Hastinapur, and was 
eloping with Laxmana, the daughter of Duryodhan. The angry Kauravas 
caught and imprisoned him. When this was communicated by Naradji, to the 
Yaduvanshis, they prepared to attack the Kauravas. Balaramji did not want a 
war between the Yaduvanshis and the Kauravas, so he went to Hastinapur to 
calm the Yaduvanshis. He told the Kauravas, "You have unjustly imprisoned 
Samba. However, we do not wish to declare war on you. So, you must 
release him and send him to Dwarka with his newly wed wife." 
Balaramji was under the impression that Duryodhan - who had learnt the 
techniques of mace fighting from him - would heed his words. Duryodhan, 
however, was too puffed up with his own power and wealth. He was 
infuriated by Balramji's words, and began to speak abusively. 
Balaramji said, 'All right. If you don't want to listen to me, be prepared to 
be destroyed." I will rid the earth of the Kauravas." Saying this, he raised his 
plough, and using the tip, began to submerge the city of Hastinapur into the 
Ganga. The ground rocked violently, and people cried out in terror. This 
frightened the Kauravas, and they surrendered at Balaramji' s feet, eulogizing 
him. Balaramji calmed down and told them not to be afraid. 



281 



Duryodhan then got his beloved daughter, Laxmana, married to Samba. He 
gave them many gifts and much dowry, and saw them go off with Balaramji. 
Back at Dwarka, Balaramji told everybody what had transpired. The people 
were all very happy at this turn of events. 

Naradji then came to Dwarka, and there is a description of how he saw the 
Lord Shri Krishna's religious activities. When you people read this, you will 
see how the Lord Shri Krishna did His duty as a husband, to every wife He 
had. You will see how respectfully He behaved with the Saints who came to 
meet Him, and how detached He was, even while occupied with all His 
activities. 

When Naradji saw all this, he eulogized the Yogeshwara*, and departed, 
singing of the Lord's Leelas, which purify all three worlds. According to 
Shri Shukadevji Maharaj, whoever listens to, or speaks of these Leelas of the 
Lord Shri Krishna, obtains a supreme love and devotion of the Lord. 
Shri Shukadevji Maharaj then described to Parikshit, the Lord Shri Krishna's 
daily schedule. He spoke of the day when the Sudharma Sabha was being 
conducted at Dwarka. A man came, on behalf of the Kings who were held 
captive by Jarasandh. "Lord," said the man, "All the Kings seek Your 
protection. They pray to you to deliver them from their troubles." 
Just then, Naradji came to the meeting, and said, "Maharaj Yudhishthira 
desires to hold a Yagya to worship You, and obtain temporal power and 
fame." 

Two appeals were thus places simultaneously before Shri Krishna. People 
began to discuss which should be given priority. Should Jarasandh be 
attacked first, or should they participate first in Yudhishthira' s Yagya? 
The episode is described briefly in the Shrimad Bhagwat, but the 
Mahabharata describes it at length. According to the Mahabharata, people 
were divided in their opinion. Balaramji, supported by Kritavarma and some 
others, became the leader of one group, while Uddhavji, supported by 
Satyaki and some others, became the leader of the other group. They began 
to argue vehemently. 

Balaramji's group was of the opinion that Yudhishthira' s Yagya was of no 
importance to them. They should focus on conquering Jarasandh. 
Uddhavji's group, however, felt that it would be more diplomatic to 
strengthen their forces first. Jarasandh was so powerful that he could not be 
easily conquered. "If the Pandava's strength is added to ours," they argued, 
"defeating Jarasandh will be an easy matter. Yudhishthira' s Yagya makes it 
imperative that other Kings are all subjugated, and that includes Jarasandh. 
So, even if our priority is to conquer Jarasandh, we should first participate in 
Yudhishthira' s Yagya." 



282 



In the end, Shri Krishna accepted the advice of Uddhavji, and told 
everybody that they should go to Indraprastha. The messenger of the 
imprisoned Kings departed satisfied. 

Yudhishthira and his brothers were very happy when Shri Krishna and 
Balaramji reached Indraprastha with their army. A warm welcome was 
accorded to them. 

Before the Yagya, Yudhishthira gave the order for the Digvijay*. All the 
Kings, except Jarasandh were vanquished. How was the Digvijay to be 
fulfilled? Yudhishthira was oppressed with this problem. 
Shri Krishna said, "Please do not worry. Uddhavji has told Me how we can 
defeat Jarasandh. It is Jarasandh' s custom that after he completes his daily 
worship, and before he has his lunch, he fulfills the wishes of his guests. I 
will go, along with Bhima and Arjuna, at that time." 

Accordingly, Shri Krishna, Bhima and Arjuna dressed themselves like 
Brahmins, and went to Jarasandh's palace. As per the Mahabharata, they 
scaled the walls of the fort, but the Shrimad Bhagwat makes no mention of 
the route they took. 

Seeing these three arrive at the time of receiving guests, Jarasandh asked, 
"What do you want?" Even though he had guessed their identity from their 
appearance, he followed the dictates of hospitality, and asked what they 
desired. 

Shri Krishna said, "Sir, we are not Brahmins. We desire no food. We are 
warriors, and desire the hospitality of fighting with you." Saying this, Shri 
Krishna introduced Himself, Bhimasen and Arjuna. 

Jarasandh was unperturbed. "All right," he said. "You will get what you 
have come for. However, Krishna, you have fled from me, so what kind of a 
fight can you put up? This Arjuna is younger than me, so I will not fight 
with him. This Bhimasen is certainly my equal. So, I am prepared to fight 
with him." 

Jarasandh gave Bhima a mace. They fought for twenty seven days. 
Ultimately, when Bhimasen began to lose hope, Shri Krishna tore apart a 
twig, indicating to Bhimasen to tear Jarasandh apart. Bhimasen did so, and 
Jarasandh was torn into two pieces. 

It has been mentioned earlier, that Jarasandh is 'Dehadhyas'. Jara had joined 
him, to make him one, otherwise he was originally in two parts. Just as there 
is a knot tying 'Jada"* to the 'Chetan*, in the same way, he had been joined 
by Jara. It was a knot between the Atma and the Anatma*. So, he could not 
be killed by only physical strength - Knowledge was needed for him to be 
destroyed. The work of Agnan is nullified by Gnan. It was this knowledge 
which Shri Krishna imparted to Bhimasen, telling him to tear his enemy 



283 



apart, and separate the two pieces. Then, the inanimate is obviously separate 
from the spirit. 

Now, when Jarasandh was killed, Shri Krishna crowned his son, Sahdev, as 
King. He then went to the imprisoned Kings and had them released. The 
Kings eulogized the Lord fervently. Their hair had grown straggled and they 
wore prisoners' clothes. The Lord arranged for their haircuts, baths, and new 
garments. He arranged for them to be given chariots and much wealth, and 
sent them off to their own Kingdoms. All the Kings became devoted to Shri 
Krishna, and participated in Yudhishthira's Yagya. 

Shri Krishna then returned to Indraprastha with Bhimasen and Arjuna. 
Everyone was glad that the Digvijay had been completed. Yudhishthira was 
too overwhelmed to say anything. 

The Yagya commenced. Shri Krishna was worshipped as the most superior 
person present. Although this did not harm Shishupal in any way, even then 
he stood up and began to talk abusively. 

Shri Krishna tolerated one hundred abuses from Shishupal, because He had 
promised this to Shishupal' s mother. When Shishupal' s abuses exceeded one 
hundred, He cut off Shishupal's head with His Chakra. Before everybody's 
eyes, a bright glow of light emerged from Shishupal's body and merged into 
Shri Krishna's body. 

Everyone was amazed to see this, and began to question how it was, that the 
spirit of a person so full of hatred, and who had abused the Lord repeatedly, 
was allowed to merge into the spirit of Shri Krishna. The fact is that the 
Lord does not look at the intention; He sees only whether the person 
remembers Him, or not. 

After Shishupal's death, the last ritualistic bath of the Yagya was completed 
peacefully. You may read the beautiful description in the Shrimad Bhagwat. 
In the same episode, it is mentioned that at Shri Krishna's bidding, the 
Mayadanav* had created a great conference Hall for Yudhishthira. This Hall 
was so unique that the floor seemed to be a pool of water, and the pools of 
water looked like solid flooring. Duryodhan was confused, and stepped into 
a pool, mistaking it for the flooring. Seeing him fall, Draupadi burst into 
peals of laughter, and Bhimasen joined her. Shri Krishna encouraged them 
tacitly. 

Yudhishthira disapproved of such mockery and rebuked them, but the 
damage could not be undone. One is amazed at the extent of hatred which 
results from an insignificant incident. Something which is considered unreal, 
illusionary or petty, can give rise to factors which end in killing elders and 
even the entire lineage. The Mahabharata war is an example of this. Even the 



284 



memory of that great war is hair raising. The foundation of that war was laid 
that day. 

The Lord Shri Krishna and Balaramji were still at Indraprastha with the 
Pandavas, when Shishupal's friend, Shalva, attacked Dwarka. He had 
undertaken severe asceticism and attained tremendous powers. By Lord 
Shankar's blessing, the demon Muy had created a huge air plane for him. 
This air plane was like a palace, and it contained a fully equipped army. 
Pradyumna, the son of Rukmini, faced Shalva' s attack. Shalva, however, 
was a great illusionist, and his blows rendered Pradyumna unconscious. 
Just then, Shri Krishna reached Dwarka with Balaramji. After a battle which 
lasted twenty seven days, Shri Krishna shattered Shalva' s air plane and 
killed him. After Shalva' s death, his friends Dantavakra and Vidoorath came 
to fight, but the Lord killed them too. 

The story goes on to say that Balaramji favored neither the Kauravas, nor the 
Pandavas. He desired the welfare of both, and was steadfast in remaining 
neutral. When he saw the preparations for the imminent war, he made the 
excuse of going on a pilgrimage, to absent himself. He visited the holy 
places on the banks of the Yamuna and Ganga, and reached a region called 
Naimisharanya. He saw Romaharshanji, who was born in the low caste of 
Suta, seated higher than the Brahmins. It angered Balaramji that 
Romaharshanji neither rose to welcome him, nor did he bow down in 
respect. Balaramji attacked him with the tip of the sharp Kusha grass, and 
Sutaji was killed by this attack. 

The Rishi-Munis present rose up in horror. Even though they were aware of 
what Balaramji' s true form was, they told him to undertake some penance 
for his action. Balaramji accepted this suggestion, in order to set an example 
to people. He placed Raomaharshani Ugrashravaa, the son of Romaharshan, 
on his father's seat, did the necessary rituals, and asked him to give 
discourses. He also blessed Raumaharshini Ugrashravaa with a long life. 
After this, Balaramji killed the demon Balval at the behest of the Rishis, and 
went to visit other places of pilgrimage. 

The significance of this incident is that Balaramji made a major change in 
the area of discourses, by establishing the tradition of the discourse of the 
Bhagwat. It was his wish that the tradition of the Shesha should also endure, 
just like the traditions of the Shrutis and Shukadevji, who comes from 
Narayana. As per his wish, Ugrashravaa became the preacher of the 
Bhagwat. 

Parikshit expressed a desire to Shri Shukadevji, that he thirsted to hear more 
of Shri Krishna's Leelas. Shri Shukadevji then narrated the story of Sudama. 



285 



The Shrimad Bhagwat describes Sudama as a Brahmagnani, virakta*, 
shantachitta* and jitendriya* Brahmin. The Tamil Bhagwat of South India, 
however, calls him 'Kuchail'. A person whose clothes are dirty is called 
kuchail. Poverty results in dirty clothes, so the name Kuchail is appropriate. 
But what is the basis of the name Sudama? The basis is that this episode is 
given in two chapters in the Shrimad Bhagwat, and 'Shreedaamaacharit'* is 
written at the end of the first chapter. This establishes that his name was 
Shreedaamaa, which later became Sudama. That apart, Shri Krishna had a 
friend of the same name, at Vraja, who was the brother of Radharani. This 
Shridama - or Sudama - however, lived near Dwarka and was a friend of 
Shri Krishna's school days. 

So, Sudama had the qualities of a Brahmin and a Sage. The Lord had 
established these qualities in him. He was filled with learning and wisdom, 
and was the embodiment of the emotional and ritual worship of the Lord. He 
was also completely free of all worldly desires. It was his custom to never 
ask for anything from anybody. He would eat whatever anyone gave him, 
and go hungry if nobody brought him anything. Due to a constant state of 
hunger, he had become so thin that his veins showed prominently. He never 
had anything decent to wear - he was always in rags. His wife's condition 
was the same. Whenever anyone gave a little rice, she would cook it and 
serve it to him, at times going hungry herself. This was how they lived. 
A time came when they got no food for several days. Driven by 
helplessness, Sudama 's wife appealed to him, "Lord, I have heard that your 
friend is Shripati - the husband of Laxmi, the Goddess of wealth - the Lord 
Narayana Himself, and that He lives close by, at Dwarka. So, if you were to 
go and meet Him, His Grace will surely bring us our daily food, at least." 
Sudama, however, was disinclined to go to the Lord for the sake of any 
material gain. He was convinced that the Lord is omniscient, all-powerful 
and supremely compassionate. "My condition is not hidden from Him," 
thought Sudama. "He must be feeling that this is the proper condition for 
me, so we should be pleased with what pleases Him. We have no need to 
make any effort." 

Along with these thoughts, it occurred to Sudama, "I don't have to ask for, 
or take anything, but if I go to Dwarka, I will have the good fortune of 
seeing the Lord. What bigger gain can there be?" 

Sudama told his wife, "All right. Since you wish me to do so, I will go. 
However, get something for me to present to Shri Krishna. It is not proper to 
go empty handed." 

Sudama 's wife was happy to hear this, but from where was she to get 
something for Sudama to take as a present? She went to four houses, and 



286 



brought back, from each, a fistful of pounded rice flakes. They were an 
assortment of reddish and white, small and big flakes. Four fistfuls of four 
kinds of pounded rice! However, there was no option. She tied them in a 
tattered piece of cloth and gave the bundle to Sudama. 

Sudama went to Dwarka. He was amazed to see the grandeur and luxury of 
the city. Shri Krishna's home never had any restrictions for Saints and 
Brahmins, so Sudama walked up to a spot where Shri Krishna could see him. 
Shri Krishna caught sight of him. At once, He put Rukmini aside, jumped 
off the bed, and came running towards Sudama. He caught Sudama warmly, 
hugged him, and said, "Friend! I'm meeting you after ages! Where were you 
all these days?" 

You see, the Shrimad Bhagwat says that Sudama went straight to Shri 
Krishna. But the 'Sudama Charit' written by Shri Narottamdasji says that 
Sudama first met the doorman, who went to Shri Krishna, saying - 

£R n^t <|^r jr^ 

Seesa pagaa na jhagaa taname^ prabhu 
Jaane ^ko aahi basai ke ^hi graamaa, 
Dhoti fate-see latee dupatee aru 
Paanya upaanahakee nahi saamaa. 
Dvaar khado dvija durbala e ^ka 
Rahyo chaki so basudhaa abhiraamaa, 
Poochata deenadayaalako dhaama 
Bataavata aapano naama sudaamaa. 

"Sir, a man has come at the door. He has no headwear, no proper coat, his 
clothes are old and tattered. He is so emaciated that people wonder at him. 
He asks where You live, and calls himself Sudama." 

As soon as the Lord heard Sudama' s name, He ran and embraced His friend. 
He said - 



287 



^fM W\ ^ff^ I 

be^haal vivaaina so paga 
Kantaka jaala lage^ punijoye\ 
Haaya mahaadukha paayo sakhaa 
Tuma aaye " itai na kitai dina khoye \ 
De^khi sudaamaakee deena dasaa 
Karunaa karake " karunaanidhi roye \ 
Paanee paraatako haatha chuyau nahi 
Nainanake jalason paga dhoye \ 

How do I clarify this? You must all be familiar with Narottamdas' poems, 
called savaiyas. I will only say that Shri Krishna washed Sudama's hands 
and feet with His tears. Such a devotee of Brahmins is Shri Krishna! Luxury 
and wealth are appreciable only when used to serve the poor and the learned. 
Actually, both the poor and the learned are forms of the Lord, but poverty is 
contained within the person who is poor, while the learned person can 
expand his learning by creating thousands of scholars. So, service to the 
hkn u i 'daridra naraayana '* must certainly be undertaken. The service to the 
learned, however, is of special importance. That is why our scriptures say 
that a donation given to a learned Brahmin protects and expands our Dharma 
and culture. 

So, Shri Krishna brought Sudama into His palace. He arranged for Sudama's 
bath, and wrapped His own pitambar round his shoulders. He gave the 
Brahmin a new sacred thread, applied sandal paste on his forehead, and 
served a delicious meal. Then the Lord made Sudama sit on His own bed, 
and worshipped him, along with all his Queens. 

Preachers say that Shri Krishna's Queens came, one by one. They would 
worship Sudama and sprinkle flowers on his head, and offer him a sweet. 
Sudama would then give the formal blessing, #HMdd) ^r, mm[ ^r, -qfriftrcT 
■Rcr ' Saubhagyavati bhava * Putravati bhava * Patipriyaa bhava * '. After the 
first few hundred Queens had worshipped him, Sudamaji asked, "How many 
more are there?" Shri Krishna signaled to him, to keep quiet. However, how 



288 



many sweets could Sudama possibly eat? He began to take a few crumbs 
from each. Then, even that became difficult. Sudama started to touch the 
sweets to his lips, and put them aside. Servants were needed to wipe the 
sandal paste from his forehead, and remove the flowers sprinkled on his 
head! Instead of saying the whole six word blessing, he started to say only 
the last word, "Bhava-Bhava". As the numbers of sixteen thousand Queens 
came closer, it was shortened further, to "Bho-Bho"! 

This, however, is not given in the Bhagwat. It is the preachers who say this, 
to make their audience laugh. 

Later on at night, Shri Krishna began to talk to Sudama about their days at 
the Gurukul*. "We used to live as equals," recalled Shri Krishna. "We had 
no feeling of who was bigger or smaller. We went, just like the other 
students, to collect firewood for cooking. Surely, you remember how 
worried our Guruji was, one day, when we got stuck in the forest due to a 
sudden storm?" 

Shri Krishna spoke about their days at Guruji' s Ashram with great 
appreciation. They passed the night in reminiscences. 

Next morning, when it was time for Sudama to leave, Shri Krishna thought 
to Himself, "I must protect the excellent qualities of My Brahmin friend, and 
respect his superior qualities of wisdom and detachment. This is an ascetic 
who desires nothing. He has never worshipped Me with any thought of 
material benefit. None the less, his wife hopes to get relief from their 
extreme poverty. It is My duty to look after those who are the dependent of 
those who depend upon Me." 

With this in mind, Shri Krishna asked Sudama, "Brahman Devta, have you 
brought anything for Me?" Sudama felt acutely embarrassed. He tried to 
hide the little bundle of four fistful of rice flakes - which exposed the entire 
history of his poverty - under his armpit. How could he open it and offer 
such stuff to the Lord? 

The Lord Shri Krishna, however, abides in every heart, and knows what is 
there. He snatched the little bundle, and had one fistful of the assorted rice 
flakes. He was about to eat one more, when Rukmini caught His hand. 
"Won't You let us have the Prasad* from the Brahmin? By eating one 
fistful, You have granted him all the wealth of the world. If you eat a second 
fistful, we will all be obliged to go to his house and serve him." 
So saying, Rukmini took some rice flakes, and distributed the rest to others. 
Everybody got the Prasad from the Brahmin's house. 

Despite all this, Shri Krishna sent Sudama off empty handed. During the 
journey home, Sudama began to think, "Just see how much respect Shri 
Krishna has for Brahmins! He embraced me, and allowed me to touch His 



289 



heart - the same heart, which is the abode of Laxmi! Not only that, He made 
me sleep on the very bed Laxmi sleeps on. He pressed my feet, with His 
hands, to serve me! 

As for the wealth, He must have thought that I may become intoxicated by 
it, and forget Him, and lose the wealth of devotion gathered so far. 
Just see - where am I, a poor, lowly person; and where is the Shriniketan* 
Shri Krishna! Still, He accepted me as a Brahmin, and caught me in His 
arms, and hugged me" - 

Kvaaham daridrah paapeeyaan kva krishnah shreennike^tanah, 
Brahmabandhuriti smaaham baahubhyaam parirambhitah. 
10. 81. 16. 

Sudama walked on, blissfully engrossed in such thoughts, towards his 
village. He saw a fabulous city, with large palaces. He thought he must have 
lost his way and gone back to Dwarka. He was trying to sort out his 
thoughts, when his wife came to welcome him. She was beautifully dressed 
with all the ornaments. A musical band accompanied her. 
Sudama understood that this was the Leela of his beloved Shri Krishna. "Just 
as the clouds shower rain while we sleep, and depart silently, so also my 
beloved Shri Krishna does not allow anyone to see that it is He who gives." 
This, actually, is the proper method for doing daan. The more secret it is 
kept, the stronger will be its effect upon the antahkaran of the donor. 
Sudama was immersed in supreme bliss. He remained detached all his life, 
using all his possessions as belonging to God. In the end, he attained the 
Lord, as a result of his Bhakti. 

The next episode is of the total Solar eclipse, when people gathered from all 
over Bharat, to the pilgrim spot of Kurukshetra, and its surrounding areas, as 
directed by the Vedas. 

The Solar eclipse is like a mark, or black spot, which mars knowledge. The 
Sun symbolizes Brightness and Knowledge, the essence of which is the 
intellect; and the mark is the feelings of attachment, detachment, pain of 
separation, and the joy of being united. There are nine 'grahas' in the sky, 
although these days people speak of more. However many there may be, 
they are all in the sky! However, the aagraha, duraagraha*, vigraha*, 
samgraha*, are also grahas which block innate knowledge. That is why it is 
said, WHlW: 'buddhe^h falamanaagrahah ' (Wisdom brings non- 
insistence in life). 



290 



That is why all the people went to Kurukshetra, to undertake the Vedic ritual 
of Yagya. Kurukshetra is the holy ground where the Devtas do Yagyas - 
<^N*i de \ayagyam kurukshe ^tram '. The people go there and remove 

the smudge of the eclipse, by bathing, doing Yagyas, and praying to the 
Lord. This eclipse of Gnan should not be tolerated even for a short while. 
So, during the Solar eclipse, the people of Dwarka and Vraja also came to 
Kurukshetra, as did people from other States. Everybody met all the others 
who had come. The men met the men and the ladies met the ladies. 
Nanda-Vasudev met after a long, long time. Vasudevji embraced Nandababa 
joyfully. They began to recall every incident, of how Kansa had harassed 
them, and how Vasudevji had taken his son to Gokul, and left him at 
Nandaji's house. 

Shri Krishna and Balaramji bowed at the feet of Nandababa and Yashoda 
Maiya. They hugged them close, unable to utter a single word. Their throats 
were choked with overwhelming love. The condition of Nanda- Yashoda was 
identical. They clung to the two brothers, and made them sit on their laps. 
Their sorrowful years of separation were erased from their hearts. 
When Rohini and Devki met Yashoda, they embraced her warmly, and said, 
"Yashodaji, you are the Queen of Vraja. We can never forget the great 
friendship and family feeling shown by you and King Nanda. You are the 
true parents of our sons, Balaram-Krishna. You have protected them the way 
a person protects the pupils of his eyes, and brought them up with great 
love." 

The Gopis also saw their beloved Shri Krishna after a long time. They 
embraced Him mentally, as they looked at Him. Seeing how engrossed they 
were in Him, Shri Krishna went to them. He asked about their well-being, 
and then said, smilingly, "Gopis, you must be despising Me, in your heart of 
hearts. You must be thinking what a traitor I am, to leave you in that 
manner. But, such enormous tasks stood before Me, that I was forced to get 
involved in tackling them. 

Gopis, one needs love, and work, and Gnan, in life. The entire Creation is a 
sport of Mine, and I am the Paramatma. Just as an earthen vessel is made of 
clay, ripples are made of water, flames are made of fire, the wind is made of 
air, and the sky fills the sky inside every creature, it is only I which is the 
world. The Atma which pervades every soul is MY essence, and it is also 
your essence." 

The Lord thus instructed the Gopis in such a way that their concept of 
individuality was dissolved, and they mentally merged into His essence. 



291 



d^fH<u|««IW^1<=l<=blvilWH«2mi lo.6R.Y6. 

Adhyaatmashikshayaa gopya e\am krishne^na shikshitaah, 
Tadanusmaranadhvasta -jeevakoshaastamadhyagan. 
10.82.48. 

The fact is that the Gopis had total faith in Shri Krishna. They had boundless 
love and a fathomless Bhakti. Where there is so much faith and love, the 
speech of the speaker goes straight into the depths of the heart, and brings 
about an instantaneous change in the life of the one who listens. This is how 
the Gopis were affected. 

Still, they said, "Our beloved Shyamsundar, certainly we are not jeevas - we 
are nitya*, shuddha*, buddha*, mukta*. But, we also desire that so long as 
we have our bodies, our hearts should be filled with love for You. When this 
body is given up, we will be one with You" - 

3TT|^r ^ nR-mi^r w^ft ^faaMft i 

Aahushcha te " nalinanaabha padaaravindam yoge ^shvarairhridi 
Vichintyamagaadhabodhaih, 

Sansaarakoopapatitottaranaavalambam ge ^hamjushaamapi manasyudiyaat 
Sadaa nah. 
10. 82. 49. 

The meeting of Shri Krishna's Queens and Draupadi is described next. 
Draupadi asked Rukmini, Satyabhama, Jambavati, Kalindi, Mitravinda, 
Satya, Bhadra, and Laxmana - the eight principal Queens, and also some of 
the others - to tell her the story of their marriages. 

All expressed their love and devotion for Shri Krishna, as they narrated the 
story of their marriage. Laxmana said, "Just as your Father had kept the 
condition of targeting a fish, my Father had kept a similar condition. The 
only difference was that the fish was covered - only its reflection could be 
seen in the water. Jarasandh, Shishupal, Duryodhan, Kama, and other great 
warriors - including your brave husband Arjuna - came, but none could hit 
the target. In the end, my Lord achieved it playfully, and I was married to 
Him." 

Hearing this, Draupadi 's false impression - that only her husband had won 
her by skilled archery, and that he was an incomparable archer - was 
banished. 



292 



Then, Rohini spoke on behalf of the sixteen thousand wives, "Noble 
Draupadi, we are very happy to have the Lord as our husband. We desire no 
luxuries. We do not even desire a universal Monarch, or the highest position. 
Our only desire is to always get the dust of the feet of our Beloved - the 
same dust, which Laxmiji applies to her chest". 

WTCTRF WT eftRcTO^T: far: I 

Na vayam saadhvi saamraajyam svaaraajyam bhaujyamapyuta, 
Vairaajyam paarame^shthayam cha aanantyam vaa hare^h padam. 
Kaamayaamaha e ^tasya shreematpaadarajah shriyah, 
Kuchakunkumagandhaadhyam moordhnaa vodhum godaabhritah. 
10.83.41-42. 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj told Parikshit that Draupadi was not the only one 
who heard the loving words of the wives of Shri Krishna. Kunti, Gandhari, 
Subhadra, the Gopis, and others were also listening. They were all entranced 
to see the deep love Shri Krishna's wives had for Him. 
Then all the great Sages - Vyas, Narad, Chyavan, Deval, Asit, Vishwamitra, 
Vasishtha, Bhrigu, Kashyap, Markandeya, Vrihaspati, Sanakadi, and others, 
who had come to Kurukshetra for the Solar eclipse, came to meet them. Shri 
Krishna-Balaram rose to greet them, with full respect, asked them to be 
seated on appropriate seats, and did the ritual worship of sixteen offerings. 
Then Shri Krishna began to eulogize them. "Mahatmas, and all present," He 
said. "Our lives are fulfilled today. The Yogeshwaras, who are rarely 
glimpsed by any, stand before us today. The pilgrimage with holy water is 
not the only place for worship. The stone or clay images are not the only 
Devtas. The fact is that the Saints are the pilgrimages and the Devtas. If we 
can serve them for even one or two ghadis*, it erases all our sins and 
suffering - h^tMcni dhnanti muhoorta se \ayaa '. " 
In the end, the Lord Shri Krishna said, "Those who consider this body, made 
of phlegm, wind and bile, to be their Atma, believe their wife and relatives 
to be the only ones worth loving, and consider the images made of the five 
elements, the only ones worthy of worship; and they who never show respect 
or extend a welcome to the Mahatmas, the source of the gift of Knowledge, 
are just like donkeys, in spite of being human." 



293 



Yasyaatmabuddhih kunape^ tridhaatuke^ 
Svadheeh kalatraadishu bhauma ijyadheeh, 
Yatteerthabuddhih salile " na karhichi- 
Jjane ^shvabhigye ^shu sa e \a gokharah. 
10. 84. 13. 

The Mahatmas were moved to the core, to hear such words of praise for 
Saints, from the lips of the Lord Shri Krishna, Himself. They discussed 
amongst themselves, "This is the Lord's way of ensuring public welfare. He 
said this to teach people what is right and proper, so that their respect for 
Mahatmas increases. Else, it is the Lord who is the object of our worship." 
The Mahatmas eulogized the Lord Shri Krishna after this. They took leave 
of Him, Yudhishthira, Dhritarashtra, and the others, and got ready to leave. 
Before they could go, however, Vasudevji entered, and begged the 
Mahatmas to give a sermon about what Yagya he should do, to be liberated 
form the fruits of his actions. 

Naradji remarked, "Mahatmas, what an amazing fact that the Lord Incarnate, 
Shri Krishna, is at the home of Vasudevji. And yet, he desires to undertake 
some action, to be liberated form the bondage of action!" 

^fa^l % Hr^HIHHK<u|cbKU|Hj 

Sannikarsho hi martyaanaamanaadaranakaaranam, 
Gaangam hitvaa yathaanyaambhastatratyo yaati shuddhaye \ 
10.84.31. 

We fail to realize the importance of something we have, close at hand. 
People, who live on the banks of the Ganga, go to bathe in other holy places, 
to purify themselves. 

The Mahatmas said, "Vasudevji, the way to be liberated from the fruit of 
action, is to worship the Lord through the work you do. You are already free 
of the debt of the Rishis, and your ancestors. Now, undertake a Yagya to 
repay the debt of the Devtas." 

Vasudevji requested the Mahatmas to undertake the Yagya for him, and 
organized a grand Yagya. He took the formal vows, along with his wives. 
When the Yagya was over, everybody had the Avabhrata Snan*. The 
Mahatmas returned to their homes, well pleased. The relatives, who had 



294 



come for this, also went back. Nandababa's group stayed on for three 
months, with Shri Krishna, Balaram and the Yaduvanshis. This time was 
spent joyfully. Ultimately, Nandababa left for Vraja with his group, and Shri 
Krishna left, with His family, for Dwarka. 

Shri Krishna-Balaram had made it a custom to go every morning, to touch 
the feet of their parents, Devki-Vasudev. Our Teachers tell us that the person 
who bows down every day to the elders in the family, is blessed with four 
things - long life, learning, renown, and strength. 



Abhivaadanasheelasya nityam vriddhopase \inah, 
Chatvaari tasya vardhante " aayurvidyaa yasho balam. 

One day, when Shri Krishna-Balaram went to bow down to Vasudev-Devki, 
as per their custom, Vasudev recalled the words of the Mahatmas, extolling 
Shri Krishna's greatness. He began to eulogize Shri Krishna, saying, "You 
are the manifest Parabrahma Paramatma." 

Shri Krishna replied, "Father, just as elders tell their children about 
'Tattvamasi', in the same way, you are counseling Me. Now regarding My 
being the Brahman, well, you are also the Brahman, and so is My Mother, 
and so is Dau Dada, and all the people of Dwarka. So much so, that the 
entire moving and unmoving world is the essence of the Brahman." 
Devki then prayed, "Please bring back my dead sons, from wherever they 
may be, because You brought back the son of Your Guru." Shri Krishna 
obeyed His mother. Along with Balaramji, He sought the aid of the Yoga 
Maya, and went to Sutal Loka. 

King Bali welcomed them warmly, worshipped them, eulogized them, and 
saw them off - along with their six brothers. Devki was filled with joy to see 
her sons, and she fed them at her breast. Then they turned into Devtas, bid 
farewell to all, and returned to Dev Loka. 

Raja Parikshit prayed to Shri Shukadevji, "Sir, you have not told me how my 
Grandmother, Subhadra, married my Grandfather, Arjuna." 
Shri Shukadevji Maharaj said, "Well, Parikshit, listen to the story of your 
Grandmother's marriage. As you know, Subhadraji was the sister of 
Balaramji and Shri Krishna. Balaramji wanted that she should be married to 
Duryodhan, but neither did Vasudev-Devki want this match, nor did Shri 
Krishna. Even the Pandavas disapproved. They planned amongst 
themselves, and Arjuna began to live at Dwarka, in the guise of a Monk. 




295 



One day Balaramji invited Arjuna - thinking him to be a Monk - to their 
house, for a meal. Arjuna met Subhadra that day, and they fell in love. When 
she went to worship the Goddess, Arjuna abducted her from the temple. 
Balaramji was extremely angry, but Shri Krishna caught his feet, saying, 
"Subhadra is our sister, and she is at the proper age for marriage. Moreover, 
she loves Arjuna. Hence, what have we lost, if Arjuna abducted her?" 
Balaramji calmed down, and got Subhadra married to Arjuna. Abhimanyu 
was born to the same Subhadra. He was married to Uttara. You are the son 
of the same Uttara- Abhimanyu. 

After this comes the episode of the Brahmin named Shrutadev and the King 
Bahulaashva, of Mithila. Both were great devotees of the Lord Shri Krishna. 
Normally, it is seen that it is the devotees who go to the Lord; but our Lord 
Shri Krishna, is such that He cannot restrain Himself from meeting those 
who love Him. So, one day, He set off to meet Shrutadev and Bahulaashva. 
The Lord, however, did not go alone. Accompanying Him were Vyas, 
Vasishtha, Shukadev, Vaamdev, and other great Sages. Their journey 
commenced from Dwarka and reached Mithilapuri. On the way, people 
would obtain a glimpse of them welcome them, worship them, and hold 
spiritual discourses. Thus, they reached Mithilapuri happily. 
When they arrived at Mithila, both the Brahmin Shrutadev and the 
Bahulaashva, King of Mithila, came to Shri Krishna and the Sages. Both 
folded their hands and prayed to the group to accept their hospitality. 
Now, what was the Lord to do? If He went to the King's palace, people 
would say that He was greedy, and went to the King because of the rich gifts 
He would receive. If He went to the Brahmin, people would say that He 
honored the Brahmin, but dishonored the King. The King is also a Devta, as 
is a Brahmin. So, they should be shown equal respect. 

The Lord Shri Krishna found a way to satisfy both His devotees. He decided 
to duplicate Himself, and all the Sages accompanying Him, as well as the 
servants, horses, chariots, etc. One batch went to Shrutadev' s hut, and the 
other to King Bahulaashva' s palace. 

Shrutadev had nothing to welcome the guests with. He only had a little 

saavan* and cool water, and a straw mat to sit on. He invited the Lord and 

the Sages to sit on the straw mat. Waving his dupatta, he danced with joy, 

and said, "It is my great good fortune, that You all have come here." 

The batch which went to King Bahulaashva, received a tremendous 

reception. The King served them in keeping with his status. 

Seeing the condition of the two devotees, the Lord created one more marvel. 

That is, He stayed for only one day at Shrutadev' s hut, with His group, but 

that one day equaled thirty days at Raja Bahulaashva's palace! 



296 



Within the same period of Time, both eulogized the Lord, and He told them 
the way to attain the Supreme Truth. He said, "Whether a pot is filled with 
Gangajal*, or whether it is filled with wine, it always has earth in it. The pot 
is the result of an action. It is a shape, and it is a name. It may perish, but the 
clay of which it is made, cannot be destroyed. So, the ultimate Truth is the 
clay." 

In the same way, the Lord explained to them, as to what material the world - 
including Shri Narayana, Shri Balaramji, and His own form - is made of. He 
also explained the way in which the Truth should be realized. 
After listening to this teaching, Shrutadev and Bahulaashva both acquired 
the essence of the Lord. The Lord and the Sages with Him, took leave, and 
departed. Once out of the two homes, the two groups merged, and returned 
to Dwarka. Shrutadev felt that the Lord had been his guest, and Bahulaashva 
felt that the Lord had come to his palace. Thus, the Lord simultaneously 
satisfied both. 

Parikshit asked, "Sir, the Lord is nirguna, nirakar, and nirvikar, so how are 
words used (to define Him)? How do the words of the Vedas describe That, 
which is beyond the cause (sat) and the effect (asat)?" 

^ TTT^fTrT ^ I I %o.£\3.%. 

Brahman brahmanyanire ^shye ' nirgune " gunavrittayah, 
Katham charanti shrutayah saakshaat sadasatah pare \ 
10. 87. 1. 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj explained, "You see, Parikshit, when we are seated 
in the body, we see the world. This body is seen within the world. The body 
contains the sense organs, intellect, and the Atma. How did these manifest? 
The body manifested in order to perform and experience the fruits of 
religious and other actions. The sense organs manifested in order to 
experience the world. The mind manifested to take decisions about accepting 
or rejecting these experiences, and also to develop goodwill and Bhakti. The 
intellect manifested in order to ponder upon all these. In this manner, all the 
jeevs live in order to achieve the four Purusharthas of Dharma, Artha, Kama 
and Moksha." 

To clarify this further, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj narrated a tale, which goes 
like this - One day Naradji went to the Sveta-dveepa*. There, he obtained an 
excellent opportunity to listen to the talks of the Sanakadis. Sanaka- 
Sanandan-Sanatana-Sanatkumar, are all equal. However, when it is time for 



297 



Satsang, they ask one to become the preacher, while the remaining three 
become the audience. 

During the Satsang, the Sanakadis said that just as a King sleeps at night, 
and is awoken every morning by panegyrists singing his praises, in the same 
way, the Lord sleeps in the Yoga-nidra* after the Maha-pralay*, and the 
Shrutis wake Him with auspicious songs. 

Or, just as Shri Radha-Krishna frolic in a garden, and the companions of 
Radhaji wake them by singing their praises, the Shrutis wake the Lord by 
praising Him. 

This incident in the Shrimad Bhagwat, is such that the maximum number of 
commentaries are available on it. The tradition of Shri Shankaracharya, 
Shridhar Swami, Veeraghavacharya of the tradition of Ramanujacharya, 
Vijaydhvaja of Shri Madhavacharya tradition, and Shudadev of Shri 
Nimbarkacharya tradition - all the representatives of these traditions have 
written commentaries. Now, enjoy the concise words of those Shrutis. 

m^m^^^m^m^ ^ \ 

W\ fa<£d^R outdid I 

Jaya jaya jahyajaamajita doshagribheetagunaam, 
Tvamasi yadaatmanaa samavaruddhasamastabhagah. 
Agajagadokasaamakhilashaktyavabodhaka te \ 
Kvachidajayaatmanaa cha charatonuchare ^nnigamah. 
Vrihadupalabdhame ^tadavayantyavashe ^shatayaa, 
Yata udayaastamayau vikrite Vmridi vaavikritaat. 
Ata rishayo dadhustvayi manovachanaacharitam, 
Kathamayathaa bhavanti bhuvi dattapadaani nrinaam. 
10. 87. 14-15. 

This meter is called the 'Naraputak Chanda'. Amongst all the stutis which 
eulogize the principal essence of the Vedas in the Shrimad Bhagwat, this is 
considered to be the most superior. Through logic, and the Shrutis, and 
experience, it describes the ultimate essence of the Lord. 



298 



The Shrutis say, "Oh Lord, Glory to You! Glory to You! The world, Kama 

and Krodha are gaining victory in our hearts." 

"Then why don't you establish your victory over them?" 

We can't do that, because Maya, which shows many where only one exists, 

has trapped us." 

"Then go ahead and kill this Maya." 

"No, Lord, she can not be killed by our strength. Only by Your power can 
she be destroyed." 

"Oh, Shrutis, how did you find out that it is My power which is in all?" 
The Shrutis said, "You frolic sometimes with Maya, and sometimes with 
Action. At that time, we describe You as the end of life. Whether the name 
is Agni, Indra, or some other, it is You, the one Paramatma, who is pervaded 
(anusyut) in all that exists. Those who do not meditate upon You, or sing 
with devotion, lose their way in this world. This Creation is actually non- 
existent in Your essence." 

In the end, the Shrutis say, H-><n-rq<il?K*h ^if^HT: 'falantyatannirase^na 
bhavannidhanaah', and negate everything except the Paramatma. They 
cancel everything, tie everything up, and then say, "Lord, You - only You 
remain. Let us be destroyed" - 

Tu prabhu jeevai mai mora jaaon. 

The Vedas do not remain, once the Paramatma is experienced, and 
ultimately they are dissolved into the Paramatma. 

At the head of the Manomay Kosha*, described in the Taittareeyopanishad, 
the Vedas are described with these words, "Lord, our purpose is to indicate 
You. The moment You are recognized, our work is over, and we merge into 
You." 

This is how the Sanakadis spoke of the Lord, who is the essence of all the 
Vedas, Puranas, and Itihasas*. Naradji was very happy to hear this 
discourse. 

Parikshit next raised the question, "What is the reason that those who 
worship Shankarji - who has given up all indulgences - are granted all 
worldly pleasures; while those who worship Laxmipati* Lord Vishnu, end 
up completely without worldly pleasures?" 

You must remember that the Shrimad Bhagwat is a Vaishnav Purana*, and 
describes the glory of Vishnu. Similarly, the glory of the Lord Shiva is 
described in the Shiva Purana. There is nothing conflicting about this. The 
Chaitanya* in Shiva is the Brahman, and so is the Chaitanya in Narayana. 



299 



They have two names and two forms, but the Brahman in both is one and the 
same. So, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj told Parikshit, "Shankarji is pleased very 
quickly. He is satisfied with very little. He is Aughad-daani*. He never 
wants to keep anything for himself, so he distributes everything to his 
devotees. However, it takes a little longer to please the Lord Vishnu." 
The Mahatmas narrate an ancient episode, in this context. It is the story of 
Vrikaasura. A fire called Vrika abided in the stomach of this demon. He had 
heard from Naradji that the Lord Shankar can be propitiated very quickly. 
He undertook a penance for pleasing Lord Shankar. He cut off chunks of his 
own flesh, and put them in the sacrificial fire. When he prepared to cut his 
head off, Shankarji caught his hand, and told him, "Don't cut off your head. 
I do not like you to do that. You may ask me for whatever you desire." 
Vrikaasura asked that he be given such a power that if he placed his hand on 
somebody's head, that person would turn into ashes. Shankarji did not at all 
like to give such a boon, but he gave it, anyway. 

As soon as Vrikaasura was granted the boon, he had a desire to abduct 
Gauriji - 'ikl^MM'U: ' ' gauriharanalaalasah '. It is impossible to know what 
untrustworthy and wicked people may do, upon any occasion. 
As soon as Vrikaasura got the desire to abduct Gauriji, he ran to place his 
hand on Shankarji 's head. Seeing this, Shankarji began to run, with 
Vrikaasura chasing him. 

When this news reached the Lord Vishnu at Vaikunth, He quickly donned 
the garb of a Brahmachari, and came before Vrikaasura. "Oh, Vrikaasura," 
He said, "Wait a moment. Why are you running so fast? Why do you strain 
yourself like this? Your breathing sounds as though you have a pair of 
bellows in your chest! And still you continue to run. Tell me, what is the 
matter?" 

Vrikaasura said, "Shankarji has given me the boon, that if I put my hand on 
anyone's head, he will turn into ashes. So, I want to place my hand on 
Shankarji head." 

The Lord Vishnu - dressed as a Brahmachari - said, "Oh! Shiva is mad! 
How on earth did you believe what he said? Can his boon ever be true? You 
should test it first." 

Vrikaasura said, "You are right - I should test it first, otherwise I'll waste 

my energy in running. But Sir, where should I test it?" 

The Lord Vishnu said promptly, "Oh, test it on your own head!" 

Now see the Maya of the Lord Vishnu! Vrikaasura accepted His suggestion, 

put his hand on his own head, and turned into ashes on the spot. 

Shankarji could now stop running. The Lord Vishnu told him, "Please don't 

grant such boons any more!" Then they both returned to their own lands. 



300 



After this, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj told Parikshit, "There was once a 
gathering of Sages on the bank of the river Saraswati. The question was 
raised, that - of Brahma- Vishnu-Mahesh - who was the greatest Devta? 
f^rat % ^i3T-f^JT- : Rt?T ' Trishvadheeshe^shu ko mahaan? ' 
The task of finding out was delegated to Bhriguji. 

Accordingly, Bhriguji went first to Brahmaji. Brahmaji thought, "My son 
has come. It is a happy occasion." However, Bhriguji stood arrogantly 
before Brahmaji, like a pillar. Neither did he bow his head before his father, 
nor did he fold his hands. He did not even touch his father's feet. Seeing this 
lack of decorum on Bhriguji' s part, Brahmaji felt very annoyed. However, 
what could he do? Should he curse, or punish his own son? One is 
compelled to tolerate the misbehaviors of one's own son. The ones who tax 
our forbearance the most, are our relatives. Therefore, Brahmaji tolerated 
this insolence silently. 

However, nothing remained hidden from Bhriguji. Coming back from there, 
he went to Shankarji. Seeing him, Shankarji came forward to meet him, 
saying, "My brother has come!" But Bhriguji said, "Oh - don't touch me! 
You wear a garland of skulls round your neck, apply ash from the 
crematorium on your body, and go about with snakes wrapped round you, as 
though they were ornaments!" 

Shankarji was furious, when he heard this. He chased Bhriguji with his 
Trishul*. However, Gauriji caught his feet, saying, "Lord, he is a Brahmin, 
and your brother. Please don't kill him." Shankarji let Bhriguji go. 
After that, Bhriguji went to the Lord Vishnu. He neither looked at the 
doorkeepers, nor did he look at Laxmiji. He went straight to the Lord 
Vishnu, who lay reclined on His Sheshashaiya, and kicked Him on the chest. 
The Lord Vishnu quickly caught Bhriguji 's foot, and began to stroke it 
gently. "Sir," He said, "My chest is very hard and your feet are very tender, 
so you must have got hurt. Had I known that you would be coming, I would 
have come forward in welcome." 

Bhriguji was delighted and entranced to see the humility of the Lord. He 
went to the gathering of the Mahatmas, and narrated the whole story. All the 
Mahatmas were very pleased, and said," The one who is forgiving and 
tolerant, is the essence of the Lord. The one who is easily angered is not 
worthy of worship." In the end, the Mahatmas decided unanimously, that 
only the Lord Vishnu is worthy of worship. 

The story given next is the story of a Brahmin who lived in Dwarka. Every 
son he had, would die after being born. This happened eight times. The 
Brahmin would bring the body of his dead son, to the door of King Ugrasen. 
He would say, "My son's untimely death is due to the impure actions of this 



301 



King. Had the King been righteous, my sons would not die thus, before their 
time." 

Arjuna was present, when the Brahmin came with the body of his ninth son, 
and began to talk abusively, as usual. Arjuna said, "Oh Brahman Devta, I 
will now protect your next son. Balaramji is here, the Lord is here, 
Aniruddha is here - but so what? If I do not succeed in saving your next son, 
I will burn myself to death on a funeral pyre." 

The tenth son of the Brahmin was born. Not only did he not survive, but 
even the lifeless body vanished. Arjuna went to other lands, even to 
Yamapuri, but failed to find the dead son. Ultimately, he prepared a funeral 
pyre, to keep his vow of burning himself to death. 

The Lord Shri Krishna said, "Don't do that, Arjuna. We will go to look for 

him." The Lord Shri Krishna took Arjuna to the land of Mahavishnu*. The 

Lord Mahavishnu was very happy to meet Shri Krishna and Arjuna. 

You see, with regard to this episode, the people of the tradition of Shri 

Ramanujacharya say, "Our Mahavishnu, or Mahanarayana, is so great! Shri 

Krishna had to prostrate Himself, before He could enter." 

However, the tradition of Gaudeshwara answer to this is, "Our Shri Krishna 

is so beautiful, so full of sweetness, so lovable, that Mahanarayana called 

Him to his abode, to have a glimpse of Him." 

Such talk, however, is caused by one's reverence for the chosen image of the 
Lord. The Lord Shri Krishna returned from the land of Mahavishnu, with the 
Brahmin's dead sons. The Brahmin was overjoyed to have his dead sons 
alive again. 

The last chapter of the tenth Skandha contains a description of the Lord Shri 
Krishna's Leelas' frolics. The sweetest aspect in this is how the wives of the 
Lord Shri Krishna get overcome by the depth of their love. The intensity of 
their love causes them to lose their perspective. Their minds turn towards 
negative thoughts, and they begin to think of His leaving them. They feel 
that the ocean heaves with love for the Lord, the mountains stand unmoving, 
out of love for Shri Krishna, the osprey cries out because she is separated 
from Him, and the swan has brought a message from the Lord. 
The wives of Shri Krishna would then experience separation, even when 
they were with the Lord. At times, when He was not there, they would feel 
that He is with them. Their mental condition was such that they were unable 
to see anything except Shri Krishna. An extremely elevated level of pure 
love manifested in their lives. 

The condition of Shri Krishna's principal wife, Rukmini, however, was quite 
different. She never experienced even mental separation form the Lord - she 
always felt that He was with her. So - as narrated earlier - Shri Krishna had 



302 



once suggested (when He saw some pride in her) that she should marry 
someone else. The result of this was that His words gave a momentary pain 
of separation, and she had lost consciousness. 

The Gopis, however, were such, that neither did they ever feel that the Lord 
Shri Krishna was not with them, nor were they ever affected by viyoga. This 
is why Shri Krishna gave them the sorrow of physical separation, which 
caused extreme distress in the Gopis hearts. The depth of pure love can 
never be experienced without going through such distress. 
Thus, the Leela of Shri Krishna's love, has three modes of expression - one 
is the love of Rukmini, the other is the love of His other wives, and the third 
is the love of the Gopis. Amongst the Gopis, is Shri Radharani's love, in 
which Shri Krishna is not parted from her for even one moment. 
At the end, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj said, "Parikshit, the jewel in the 
Yaduvanshi crown, Shri Krishna, came and did His Leela, so that people 
could listen to all that He had done, sing about the Leelas, and dwell upon 
them mentally. They would get so immersed in the sweetness of the Leelas, 
that they would lose all awareness of the world around them. This is why the 
Dasama (tenth) Skandha is called the Nirodh Skandha. 
What does Nirodh mean? People's minds wander hither and thither, in the 
world. Just as a dog goes from door to door - getting a stick at one door, and 
some food at another - the human mind also wanders in the same way. It 
needs a shelter in order to curtail its wanderings. This shelter is the unique 
fragrance which comes from the Lord's body. It is the unique sweetness of 
His Charanaamrita. It is the rippling sea of His incomparable beauty! It is 
His tender touch! It is the sweet sound of His flute! It is His divine music! 
His heavenly love! 

A person should immerse himself in these, to an extent that the sorrows and 
troubles of the world cannot even enter his heart. The Lord Shri Krishna 
adopts an Avatar, and undertakes all his Leelas, so that everybody's minds 
get attracted towards Him, and intertwined within Him." 
Ultimately, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj gives the Victory cry, "Victory to the 
Jewel in the Crown of the Yaduvanshis. Victory to Lord Shri Krishna, the 
son of Devki. Victory to Lord Shri Krishna, the son of Nanda. Victory to 
Lord Shri Krishna, the beloved of the Gopis. Victory to Lord Shri Krishna, 
who achieves the good of all." 

The tenth Skandha ends with this Victory cry. Now we have tomorrow and 
the day after - two days left. I will use them to give you the essence of the 
eleventh and twelfth Cantos. 

Om Shantih Shantih Shantih. 



303 



BHAGWATAMRIT 



Pravarchan XIII 
(Skandha XI) 

The eleventh Skandha of the Shrimad Bhagwat is considered to be the Mukti 
Skandha, and is universally accepted as such. The first five chapters tell us 
how, through Bhakti and the qualities of the Bhaktas, people conquer the 
Maya which arises from Avidya, and attain liberation. The Mukti of the 
Jeeva is given in five chapters because Avidya has five knots - Avidya, 
asmita*, raga*, dvesha*, and abhinivesha*. The next twenty four chapters 
describe how liberation is obtained from the twenty four elements of Nature. 
The last two chapters show how to shed the drama of the Brahman. That is, 
how to discard the robe of make-believe, or remove the make-up of the role. 
And this is called Brahm-mukti*. Thus, these thirty one chapters bring the 
eleventh Skandha to its conclusion. 

The first chapter has an extraordinary incident. When a Yogi wants to 
advance in Yoga, he first has to adopt good qualities, to destroy negative 
tendencies. When he has used goodwill and compassion, and joy and lack of 
expectation, to counter inimical tendencies, he has to block even these good 
qualities, to attain Samadhi. He will not be able to attain Samadhi unless he 
succeeds in blocking all tendencies, because tendencies do not remain during 
Samadhi. 

In the same way, it is explained in the first chapter of the eleventh Skandha, 
that the Lord Shri Krishna used the Yaduvanshis, Pandavas, and others, to 
destroy the demonic forces. Then, He negated the Yaduvanshis and 
Pandavas, to return to the natural essence of His Self. 
Whether handcuffs and leg-shackles are made of iron, or of gold, they bind 
the hands and feet. So, Satsang is needed to be free from dusang*. And, for 
establishing ourselves in the Self, a person has to be liberated even from 
Satsang. To reveal this Leela, the Lord Shri Krishna first had the wicked 
tendencies destroyed by the Pandavas. Then, only the Yaduvanshis 
remained. They destroyed themselves by fighting with each other. 

Kritvaa nimittamitare^taratah same^taan, 



304 



Hatvaa nripaan niraharat kshitibhaarmeeshah. 
11. 1. 2. 

Now, see - peace and compassion are both tendencies of Sattvaguna. 
However, when there is a clash between the two, the Yogi abandons 
compassion and chooses peace. 

In the same way, the Lord used the instrument of mutual relatives, to 
completely destroy all the bad and good tendencies, and then departed for 
His abode. 

When the time for their destruction came, Shri Krishna's sons went to test 
the very same Mahatmas who were worshipped by Shri Krishna. The 
youngsters dressed Samba, Jambavati's son, like a woman. Then they asked 
the Mahatmas, "Will she get a son or a daughter?" 

Samba was born by the grace of the Sun. He was extremely good looking. 
Even the noblest of women would be fascinated when they saw him. The 
Mahatmas, however, recognized him because they were trikaladarshi. They 
were aware of what the Lord desired - ^Mc^lfaqi: ' bhagavatkovidaah '. They 
understood that when these youngsters - born in the lineage of the Lord - 
are so badly lacking in shraddha, it is a clear indication that the Lord wants 
to curtail, and fold up His lineage. 

That is why the Mahatmas said, "You fools! Neither a daughter nor a son 
will be born. From inside the layers of cloth which you have wrapped round 
the stomach, a pestle will emerge, and this will be the cause of your 
lineage's destruction." 

This made the Yaduvanshi youngsters very nervous. Still, they said nothing 
about it to Shri Krishna. This was the only incident to occur in Dwarka, 
which was not reported to Shri Krishna - rather, you can say that it was kept 
concealed from Him. In any case, the Lord was not unaware of it. He could 
have avoided the curse, had He wanted to, or changed it as He chose. 
However, He desired something different. 

The youngsters went to Ugrasen, and told him what had happened. Even 
Ugrasen did not tell Shri Krishna about it. He advised the boys to crush the 
pestle to powder, and throw it into the sea. The youngsters did that, and it 
grew into a kind of grass, on the sea shore. A large, sharp chunk was left 
over, and was obtained by a hunter called Jara. 

Now, you know Jara. Jara means old age, which comes to all. Everything 
gets old. The end of youth is Jara. It is old age. Even in the Gita, it is written, 

Jaraavyaadhidukhadoshaanudarshanam. 



305 



The same Jara came as a hunter, and became the tool for the completion of 
the Lord's Leela. The Lord was satisfied that matters would end as He 
wished. 

Naradji's dialogue with Vasudevji is given after this. I have been saying, 
right from the beginning, that meeting the Lord is not enough. Dhruva had a 
vision of the Lord, but still he got angry with the Yakshas. It was 
Swayambhuva Manu who calmed him down. Prithu also got angry after he 
had met the Lord. The Prachetas had a vision of both Lord Shankar and Lord 
Vishnu, and still they became extremely angry. They obtained Tattvagnan 
only when Naradji came and preached to them. Similarly, Shri Krishna 
failed to remove Yudhishthira's remorse - he was freed from it by 
Bhishmapitamah's discourses. The Shrimad Bhagwat has many such 
instances. That is why it is said that this is not a Bhagwat Purana - it is a 
Bahaagwat Purana - the Purana of the Bhaktas. The devotees of the Lord are 
praised even more than Him! 

Take the example of Devki-Vasudev. They were the Mother and Father of 
the Lord. The Lord had granted them a vision of His four-armed form as 
soon as He was born. The Rishis had eulogized the Lord in their presence. 
They saw any number of the Lord's miracles - including the bringing back 
of their six dead sons. Despite all this, they did not attain Tattvagnan. So the 
Lord inspired Naradji, and he arrived to give them the instruction. 
The fact was that the curse given by Daksha - that Naradji would not be able 
to stay at any place for long - did not apply at Dwarka. So, he would return 
to Dwarka, each time he was sent off. Sometimes, the Lord would send him 
to find out how things were, in Heaven. Sometimes he was asked to go to the 
Pandavas on some pretext. Naradji loved the Lord so much that he would 
find some excuse to return to Dwarka. The fact was that Shri Krishna was so 
beautiful that Naradji just had to keep returning, to gaze at Him. 

Ko nu raajannindriyavaan mukundacharanaambujam, 
No bhaje V sarvatomrityurupaasyamamarottamaih. 
11.2.2. 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj told Raja Parikshit, "Which mortal man, 
possessing sound senses, would possibly neglect to obtain the divine 
fragrance of the lotus feet of the Lord, and listen to the sweet sound of His 



306 



voice? As a prime devotee of the Lord, it was natural for Naradji to possess 
an extraordinary devotion for Him." 

Now, who has the right to be a devotee of the Lord? Just as a Brahmin has 
the right to do the Vajpeya Yagya, a Kshatriya has the right to do a Rajasuya 
Yagya, a Vaishya has the right to do a Vashyastome Yagya, a Nishad* has 
the right to do a Nishadasthapati Yagya, and a person who has all the 
qualities called Sadhan Chatushtay* has the right to study Vedanta; in the 
same way, who has the right to develop Bhakti? 

All the creatures who have sense organs have a right to devotion. Not only 
humans, even birds can gaze at the lord's beauty, and even an animal can 
feel love for Him. Then, how can Naradji lag behind? 

Hence, even when Naradji returned after having gone somewhere, the Lord 
sent him to Vasudevji. After giving him a warm welcome, Vasudevji asked 
Naradji, "Sir, in my past life, I had worshipped the Lord to get Him as my 
son. At that time I was deluded by His Maya. Now, I ask you to free me 
from that Maya, and counsel me so that I may obtain that, which is the most 
beneficial." 

Naradji was very happy to hear Vasudevji 's words. However, he had some 
reservations. He felt, "Vasudevji sees that I am the 'aashik'* of his son Shri 
Krishna; I am 'aasakta'* with Him." 

You see, aashik-aasakta come from the same root. Knowledge must be 
respected - we should not quarrel over words. We should obtain Knoweldge 
regardless of which language it is given in. In the Manusmriti it is written 
that even if it comes from a low caste person, we should definitely strive to 
obtain the knowledge of the highest Dharma. 

SHiR: ^ft faaiHI<w)dloKKfa I 

Shraddhaanah shubhaam vidyaamaadadeetaavaraadapi, 
Antyaadapi paramam dharmam streeratnam dushkulaadapi. 

So, Naradji felt, "When Vasudevji sees that I am attached to his son, he may 
find me unsuitable as a counselor." So, he began to narrate the story of the 
nine Yogishwaras*. The names of these nine prime Yogis are Kavi, Hari, 
Antariksha, Prabuddha, Pippalaayana, Aavirhotra, Drumil, Chamasa and 
Karabhaajana. 

Kavirharirantarikshah prabuddhah pippalaayanah, 



307 



Aavirhotrotha drumilashchamasah karabhaajanah. 
11. 2. 21. 

They were all supremely detached, on the highest level of detachment. They 
came from an excellent lineage, their detachment was superior, and their 
Knowledge was most superior. Shri Shukadevji Maharaj has described their 
experience thus - 

Ta e y te " bhagavadroopam vishvam sadasadaatmakam, 
Aatmanoavyatire ^ke ^na pashyanto vyacharan maheem. 
11.2.22. 

These Mahatmas saw the moving and unmoving world - including the gross 
and subtle - as the form of the Lord, and saw the Lord as being one with 
their own Self. According to their experience, the world is the work of the 
Lord. It is illumined by the Lord, is inseparable from the Lord, and the Lord 
is not separate from the Atma. 

These nine Mahatmas, whose detachment is supreme, went once to the 
Yagya Mandap of Raja Nimi. Raja Nimi was renowned for his Yagyas. As 
soon as he saw the Mahatmas, Raja Nimi halted the worship, and got up - 
along with the Brahmins doing the ritual - and, carrying some of the 
sacrificial fire, went forth to greet them. After a ceremonious welcome, he 
asked them to be seated on singhasanas*, and asked - 

Ata aatyantikam kshe ^mam prichhaamo bhavatonaghaah. 
11.2. 30 

"Sirs, please instruct me upon what is best for me. Please tell me that, which 
is aatyantik and niruttar." 

'Aatyantik' means 'that, after which no further happiness remains to be 
gained', and 'niruttar' means, 'after which nothing remains'. You can call it 
'laa-javaab' or 'laa-saani'. 

When Raja Nimi placed these questions, the first Yogishwara, Kavi - who 
was a form of the Lord incarnate - began to preach. 

"King, you must first know why the people in this world are unhappy. 
^l^W^TM 'UdvignabuddeVasadaatmabhaavaat' - the people in this 
world are unhappy because they consider that, which is untrustworthy, 



308 



transient, a form of sorrow, to be theirs. The Sansara* does not belong to 
anybody. The Sansara is that, which can never be caught. That, which can 
never be abandoned, is the Atma, the Paramatma. Those who are busy trying 
to catch this Sansara are always agitated. Their intellect and mind are full of 
fearful possibilities. The treatment for this is to worship the Lotus feet of the 
Lord Achyut*. 

This entire world of duality is in the imagination of our mind, which is 
stuffed into us after our birth. Where the matters of Dharma are concerned - 
like serving our parents, loving our brothers and friends, showing 
compassion to those in distress, etc. - they are all right and proper. However, 
all worldly relationships have been superimposed in our minds. People told 
you, 'This is your Mother'. Your Mother told you, 'This is your Father'. The 
Brahmin said, 'This is your wife; this is your husband'. Thus, all 
relationships are superimposed. So, the best of all is the worship of those 
lotus feet of the Lord, which never slip from their position. 
This world is an illusion created by the mind's imagination. So, it is 
important to control the mind. If it is not possible to achieve this through the 
practice of Yoga, then we should get engrossed in loving thoughts and songs 
of the Lord's Leela and great qualities." 

Shrinvan subhadraani rathaangapaaneVjanmaani karmaani cha yaani 
loke \ 

Geetani naamaani tadarthakaani gaayan vilajjo vichare ^dasangah. 
11. 2. 39. 

The Lord is 'Rathangapani'*. The Kalachakra* is in His grip. All the 
situations - Creation, Existence, and Dissolution - are controlled by Him. 
When He saw His devotee, Arjuna in trouble, He picked up a chariot wheel, 
and ran to attack Bhisma. He did not bother about His vow to not take up 
arms in the Mahabharata war. He became Rathangapani. 

Aaju yadi harihi na shastra gahaavon, 

Tau laajau gangaa jananeeko santanusuta na kahaavon. 

So, Yogishwara Kavi says, "Chant, sing, and listen to the name and Leela of 
the Lord - who is so full of Fatherly love for His devotees." It is not that 



309 



only the Vedic names are to be used. #^ ^fR 4?#t 'Loke^ cha yaani 
geetaani' - the people of Vraja take the name in their Rasiyaas*, and the 
Mahatmas take the name of the Lord in their language. So, sing in your 
language. When you go on singing His name, your intellect will be filled 
with Him, and you will see Him everywhere. A love for Him will fill your 
heart, and your attention will be directed towards the essence of His form. 
Then you will be detached from the world, and only when you are attached 
(to Him), will you obtain an understanding of the essence of the Lord - 
^Rdft<Rd'H'icvisilq': 'bhaktirviraktibhagavatprabodhah'. Ultimately, you will 
obtain supreme peace. 

Raja Nimi then asked, "What are the characteristics of a Bhakta?" 
Hari, the second Yogishwara, explained. 

^qfpj zf: qricr^HidHlrHH: I ^.^.^ 

Sarvabhoote ^shu yah pashye V/ bhagavadbhaavamaatmanah. 
11.2.45. 

"My brother, don't divide and separate the Lord, restricting Him to be this or 
that. Experience Him in everyone, experience Him as everything, and 
experience Him to be the Atma of all. Then you will be able to attain the 
highest degree of equanimity. This is the indication of a Bhakta of the 
highest kind. 

He, who loves the Lord, feels friendly towards Bhaktas, helps those who 
suffer, and ignores those who oppose him, is a Bhakta of the second 
category. 

Those who merely hold on to an image of the Lord, and its ritual worship - 
worshipping no one else - are elementary Bhaktas." 

The words, "*T^T: ^?T: ^?T: 'bhaktah praakritah smritah ' used here as basic, 
are explained by Shridhar Swami, as ^?T: wu^: 'praakritah praarambhah ' 
meaning, they are just beginners. 

In this way, Hariji described the characteristics of the nirguna Bhakta in 
eight shlokas, and explained the characteristics of a saguna Bhakta in the last 
three shlokas. In describing the signs of a saguna Bhakta, he says, 

Tribhuvanavibhavahe^tave^pyakunthasmritirajitaatmasuraadibhivimrigyaat, 
Na chalati bhagavatpadaaravindaallavanimishaardhamapi yah sa 
vaishnavaagryah. 



310 



11. 2. 53. 



"The highest amongst the Bhaktas is he, who is unwilling to leave the lotus 
feet of the Lord, even if he is given all three worlds in exchange." 

Bhagavata uruvikramaanghrishaakhaanakhamanichandrikayaa 
nirastataape \ 
11. 2. 54. 

Worldly discomforts never trouble such a devotee. Those who are turned 
away from the Lord are the only ones who are sorrowful. The purifying 
memory of the Lord can not exists simultaneously with sorrow. Darkness 
exists only in the absence of light. 

Visrijati hradayam na yasya 

saakshaadhariravashaabhihitopyadhaudhanaashah. 

11. 2. 55. 

The Lord is such that He destroys your sins if you take His name even out of 
helplessness. The true Bhakta is the one who has the Lord seated constantly 
on the lotus seat of his heart; who has tied the Lord with the string of love; 
and for whom, the glint of the Lord's toe nail suffices to eliminate all 
darkness." 

After this, Raja Nimi asked, "What is Maya?" The third Yogishwara, 
Antariksha, answered, "Everything else, which you see in the Paramatma - 
like Creation, Existence and Dissolution - all this is called Maya, W "ffFTT 
VM: 'e^shaa maayaa bhagvatah '. " 

Raja Nimi then asked, "Please describe the method by which release from 
Maya can be obtained." In reply, the fourth Yogishwara, Prabuddhaji, said, 
"You must first understand that the world is sorrow personified. Then you 
should surrender to a Sadguru*. There, you should follow his instructions, 
given for your spiritual progress, and spend your time in listening to 
discourses, or chanting the names of the Lord, and His wonderful qualities. 
This makes one free of Maya." 

Raja Nimi asked his fifth question, "What is the Brahman?" It was answered 
by the Yogishwara Pippalaayana. "Our Lord's characteristic is not to create 
the world and throw it away," he said. "He is not such as to make the world 
- like one makes a pot, and send it to the market to be sold. Our Lord has a 



311 



direct relationship with the world; with its Creation, Sustenance and 
Dissolution. He does not roam in some seventh heaven. In fact, He manifests 
as this world. Our Ishwara always abides with us, whether we are awake, 
asleep, or dreaming, and even beyond these states" - 

Sthityudbhavapralayahe ^turahe ^turasya 

Yat svapnajaagarasushuptishu sad bahishcha. 

11. 3. 35. 

Pippalaayana said, further, "The Brahman can be experienced only when the 
heart is pure. However, how can the heart be made pure? It is Bhakti, which 
purifies the heart. 

Yarhyabjanaabhacharanaishanayorubhaktyaa 
Che ^tomalaani vidhame V/ gunakarmajaani. 
11. 3. 40. 

Bhakti is a desire for the feet of the Lord. Because, desire is pregnant - the 
lotus feet of the Lord abide in its stomach. Just as the thing we love, is in the 
stomach of desire, in the same way, the Lord's feet come into the heart, 
when there is a desire to obtain them. This washes away the impurities of the 
mind. Then - one achieves the realization of the Paramatma." 
After this, a question was asked, by Raja Nimi, concerning actions 
(Karmas). In reply, the sixth Yogishwar, Aavirhotra said, "King, it is 
extremely difficult to understand karma, akarma* and vikarma* in this 
Sansara. Only the Lord, or the Mahatmas who have experienced His 
essence, know this. To come to an ill-considered conclusion, that 'this is 
paapa*' and 'this is punya*' is an indication of ignorance. Who is there - 
apart from the Paramatma - who has experienced paapa and punya? This is 
why the Lord does not see the right or wrong; He accepts whoever seeks His 
protection. 

STFf ■^TCH ?Rt cffi^l I 

Koti vipra vadha laage^hijaahoo, 
Aaye " saran tajo nahi taahoo. 



312 



The Lord does not view sin and merit the way you see it. Your good and bad 
actions do not weigh even as little as a light raindrop, on the scales of His 
infinity and non-duality. That is why the Lord accepts the one who 
surrenders to him." 

Aavirhotraji continued, "The antahkaran is purified by the actions prescribed 
in the Vedas and the Shastras. 

Ve ^doktame \a kurvaano nihsangorpitameeshvare \ 
Naishkarmyaam labhate " siddhim rochanaarthaa falashrutih. 
11.3.46. 

So, the person who wants to be free from the bonds of action should worship 
the Lord through his actions. Karma is karma only when it is undertaken for 
worldly gain. It becomes Karmayoga* when it is undertaken for the Lord, 
with a wish to serve the Lord who abides in all, and is free of any selfish 
motive." 

After this, when Raja Nimi asked about the Avatars of the Lord, the seventh 
Yogishwar, Drumil, said, "Raja, Avatara is a staircase, a flight of steps. A 
staircase is necessary, whether one wants to go up, or descend. You can 
experience the Brahman, when you investigate into the details of the Lord's 
Avataras - for the purpose of realizing the Brahman." 

The Lord has created the panchabhootas* within Himself. When He creates 
the Brahmanda*, and enters into it - as the one who abides in all - that 
Adideva*, Narayana, is called the Purusha. This is His final Avatara. It is 
He, who - as Brahma, creates the world; it is He, who - as Vishnu, sustains 
it; and - as Rudra, destroys it. It is He who came as the Nara-Narayana*, and 
continues to do tapasya to protect the world. Once Indra saw their tapasya 
and feared that they would snatch his Heaven away. So, Indra sent the 
Apsaras, the season of spring, and the mellow Southern breeze. Music and 
dance prevailed all round Nara-Narayana, but failed to arouse them in any 
way. They watched everything with supreme indifference. 
Now, the Apsaras, and others, sent by Indra became very nervous, incase 
these Ascetics placed a curse on them. Nara-Narayana, however, told them, 
"Don't be afraid." He showed them a number of lovely women created by 
His Maya. Of these, they took Urvashi back with them, to make her an 
ornament of Heaven. Urvashi, therefore, is not an Apsara born of any action. 
She did not arise out of the churned ocean. She is a Narayani - created by 
Narayana. This is why the lineages which continue through her are lineages 



313 



of the Lord. Her relationship with Pururva also had the purpose of 
facilitating the Lord's Avatar. 

The Yogishwara Drumil described many of the Lord's Avatars in the same 

way. You can read about them in the Shrimad Bhagwat. 

Raja Nimi's next question was, "What is the fate of those whose desires are 

not stilled, whose sense organs are uncontrolled, and who do not worship the 

Lord?" 

Answering this, the eighth Yogishwara, Chamas, said, "You see, Raja, it is a 
great wrong-doing, on the part of human beings, when they neglect to do 
bhajan or neglect to cultivate devotion for the Lord. All those in this world - 
like the Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, Shudras; and the Brahmacharis, 
Grihastas, Vanaprasthas and Sanyasis - have been created from the very 
being of the Lord. The Parameshwara is the Father, and the Mother of the 
Creation. He is the Master and He is the Atma - 3n?qprwT, 
'aatmaprabhavam', 'eeshvaram'. Hence, the one who does not serve his 
parents or Master, and does nothing for the benefit of his soul, becomes a 
great sinner. 

The person whose desires are not stilled, and who has no self-control, 
invariably gets trapped in the worship of his little ego, and self-satisfying 
activities. He forgets the essence of his parentage, Master, and Atma. His 
tendencies incline towards violence, sex and gambling, and these cause his 
downfall. One should, therefore, be watchful and worship the Lord. To 
worship the Lord one must have the requisite Knowledge about Him." 
Then, Raja Nimi asked, "At what time, and in what form, should we worship 
the Lord?" The ninth Yogishwara, Karabhaajana, gave the answer. 
"Raja, Satyayuga-Treta-Dvapar-Kaliyuga, are the four Yugas in which the 
Lord comes as different Avataras. In the Kaliyuga, people chant and sing the 
name, qualities and Leelas of the Lord." 

Now see, amongst the shlokas of the stutis in the Shrimad Bhagwat, one 
stuti describes the glory of Shri Ramachandra. 

3^cM,H| i|^J|K<ui|H J 

Tyaktvaa sudustyajasure ^psitaraajaylakshmeem 
Dharmishtha aaryavachasaa yadagaadaranyam, 
Mayaamrigam dayitaye ^psitamanvadhaavad 
Vande " mahaapuroosha te " charanaaravindam. 
11. 5. 34. 



314 



This means, "The Lord Shri Ramachandra sacrificed the wealth of the 
Kingdom, which was ever sought by the Devtas. He had such filial devotion 
that - at the command of His father - His lotus feet wandered in the forests. 
His love for His wife was such that to please her, He chased the magic deer, 
knowing fully well that it was not a real deer. This is the Lord Ramachandra, 
at whose feet we surrender." 

It is on the basis of this shloka that the people of Ayodhya say, "Even your 
Kaarshni Bhagwat*, your Vasudev Bhagwat says that one should worship 
Rama in the Kaliyuga." Karabhaajanji also said, "Kaliyuga is superior to 
other Yugas, because in this Yuga, there is no need for Gnan, dhyan*, 
upasana*, and Yagya. Within this eon of Time, you can obtain everything by 
simply singing the name of the Lord." 

Kalim sabhaajayantyaaryaa gunagyaah saarabhaaginah, 
Yatra sankeertane^naiva sarvah svaarthobhilabhyate\ 
11. 5. 36. 

Thus, when Naradji completed narrating the episode of the Nava 
Yogishwaras, Devki- Vasudev were wonder-struck, by listening to this 
description of tattvagnan. Their were freed from delusion - 

E^tacchrutvaa mahaabhaago vasude\otivismitah, 
De \akee cha mahaabhaagaa jahatumohamaatmanah. 
11. 5. 51. 

After this comes the incident of Brahma and other Devtas, coming to the 
Lord. "Lord", they prayed, "the purpose of our prayers to You, is now 
accomplished. If You feel that it is appropriate, please return to Your land." 
The Devtas flew away immediately after saying this. They were afraid that 
the Yaduvanshis - who had become extremely brash - would catch them. 
Uddhavji had come to know that the Lord Shri Krishna had got the 
Mahatmas to place a curse on His lineage, and He also meant to leave. So, 
Uddhavji came to the Lord, and said, "I cannot live for a single moment 
without You, so please take me with You." The Lord, however, had decided 
that Uddhavji should remain on earth, and continue to spread His gnan. "The 



315 



tradition of My gnan should continue," He thought. So, Uddhavji's desire 
was changed instantly by the Lord's inspiration, and he said - "I wear Your 
discarded garments, I eat Your leftovers, I sleep and wake, get up and sit 
down, with You. Then, how will I be able to live without You?" 
The Lord explained to Uddhavji, "Your conclusion is correct. I have decided 
to leave. You, however, should be detached, and concentrate on Me, and do 
My bhajan - 

Tvam tu sarva parityajya sne ^ham svajanabandhushu, 
Maiyyaave ^shya manah samyak samadrig vicharasva gaam. 
11. 7.6. 

See, Uddhav, this whole world is a play of the mind. When a person's mind 
is restless, he sees diversity, and when it is at rest, he no longer sees the 
multitude. So, everything is mental. It is Maya, and it is transient. One 
should not get trapped in this revolving wheel. 

Uddhav, the person who is beyond faults and good qualities is a liberated 
Mahapurush, and a jeevanmukta. A Mahapurush never gets trapped in the 
Sansara. His behavior is childlike. He does not accept people because of 
their good qualities, and nor does he reject them thinking that they are bad. 
All his actions are as simple as a child's." 

Uddhavji said, "Lord, what You have told me is extremely difficult. So, 
please explain all these things, in a simple manner, so that I can understand 
easily, and put in my efforts accordingly." 

The Lord Shri Krishna spoke of how Dattatreya met Yadu, and said, "Raja 
Yadu saw a hefty Mahatma lying at the foot of a mountain, supremely 
unconcerned with the world. Yadu said, 'Sir, the whole world burns with 
various problems, and you are such that it is as though you were living in the 
cool waters of the Gangaji. Tell me, what is the source of the deep joy within 
you? You have no luxurious indulgences - then, how can you be so 
happy?" 

The Mahatma said, "Yadu, you know everything. When Brahmaji started to 
create, he was not fully satisfied with any of the forms he made. It was only 
when he created the human form, that he felt happy. The Lord is very fond 
of the human form, because it is very close to His own form. In the human 
form, it is the intellect which dominates. Only human beings are subject to 
paapa and punya - animals and birds neither sin, nor gain merit. This is 
because only humans have been given hands and brains and facilities for 



316 



obtaining pleasures. When the jeeva enters a human body, then the essence 
of the Atma manifests before him. This is why it is essential that a human 
being should use his intelligence, and through the logic of anvay*-vyatirek*, 
become aware of his true essence. 

Raj an*, I take the shelter of twenty four Gurus, through my intellect. I roam, 
with total freedom, in this world, because of the lessons I have learnt from 
them. My twenty four Gurus are - the earth, wind, sky, water, fire, the 
moon, the sun, a pigeon, a python, the sea, a butterfly, a wasp or bee, an 
elephant, a honey-collector, a deer, a fish, the prostitute Pingla, an osprey, a 
child, an unwed maiden, an arrow maker, a snake, a spider, and the 
bhringee*. 

From the earth, I learnt how to forgive. From the wind, I learnt how to 
remain unattached, and the sky taught me to be al-pervading. From water I 
learnt how to satisfy, and from the fire I learnt how to burn everything. The 
blacksmith was so engrossed in the arrow he was making, that he did not 
notice that the King's procession was passing by. When the bangles of the 
unwed maiden clinked, she began to break them one by one, until she had 
just one bangle on each hand, and no more clinking sounds. Whenever many 
people stay together, there is always some friction. I saw the pigeon die, due 
to his attachment to his family. I also saw how an elephant gets trapped by 
touch, a fish is trapped by food, and honey gathered by bees is stolen by the 
honey-collector. In the same way, I learnt from the rest of the Gurus." 
Dattatreyaji Maharaj shows us - by describing these twenty four Gurus - 
how a man who is alert can learn valuable lessons from everything he sees. 
So, an intelligent person should develop his insight enough to be able to 
learn lessons wherever he goes and whatever he sees. 

Dattatreyaji told Yadu that this body is the cause for detachment and 
disinterest. Prajapati created it for the purpose of seeing the Paramatma, but 
it gets trapped in the world. However, if a person wants to, he can liberate 
himself. 

See, on the one hand is a righteous King like Yadu, and on the other hand is 
a Mahatma like Dattatreya. Yadu is Shri Krishna's ancestor, and Dattatreya 
is a direct Avatar of the Lord Vishnu. Both are of a high caliber. This is why 
their dialogue gifted tattvagnan to the world. 

After this, Shri Krishna told Uddhavji, "You see, there should be a purpose 
in the Dharma you practice. The Dharma of the Yagyas, etc., lays emphasis 
on the doer. The karta* must have the eligibility, and the karma must adhere 
fully to the stipulations and specifications. If the stipulations are fulfilled 
perfectly, then an apoorva* is created, which is retained in the antahkaran of 



317 



the person who undertakes the Yagya, and gives its fruit at the appropriate 
time. 

The Bhagwat-Dharma, however, does not depend upon the doer - it depends 
predominantly upon the purpose with which the work is done. Which 
Paramatma do you wish to worship through your actions - ^4 ^TFT ^fepsrT 
fer^T 'kasmai daivaaya havishavidhe ^ma '? 

Who do you cook for? For feeding the people who are the forms of the Lord, 
in His creation. For whom do you grow food? For the Lord, who is in every 
form. For whom do you make clothes? For Him, who is in all. Who do you 
purify iron for? For everybody's convenience, because it is the Lord who 
abides in all the forms. 

The uniqueness of the Bhagwat-Dharma is that, according to this, the Lord is 
in all forms. And our actions are for serving all. Whatever you do, offer it all 
in the service of the Lord who is in all. Shridhar Swami has said that any 
work done for the Lord becomes Dharma. But, in the section of the 
ritualistic Karma-kand* of the scriptures, however, only ritualistic worship is 
considered Dharma. There is an immense difference between the Bhagwat 
Dharma and the Karma-kand Dharma." 

The Lord said, further, "Uddhav, one should understand the secret of this 
world, and then think about the Atmatattva*, because it is only by the 
Knowledge of the Atma that a person can be freed from the world. Just as 
fire is inherent in wood, even before it flares up by the friction of rubbing 
two dry pieces of wood vigorously, in the same way, the Atma and 
Paramatma are hidden in the body. When one uses discrimination to bring it 
forth, then the Chetan separates itself from the body - just like juice 
squeezed out of sugar cane. This has three steps. One is, 'I am not the gross- 
subtle-individual body. I am the Atma, which is separate from this body. I 
am unattached to this body, and I am the witness of it.' The second is, 'The 
unattached witness - the Atma - is not separate. It is one with the Parabrahm 
Paramatma, and one with everything. The Brahman is the sub-stratum of the 
illusionary common denomination (of individual creatures).' 
The third step is, 'Nothing exists, except the Paramatma.' By pondering 
deeply upon these three points, a person's ignorance about the Atma is 
dispelled. The purpose of tattvagnan is to dispel ignorance. 

Baddho mukta iti vyaakhyaa gunato me " na vastutah, 
Gunasya maayaamoolatvaanna me " moksho na bandhanam. 
11.11.1 



318 



In the Atma, there is neither bondage nor liberation. The impression of 
bondage is created by the sattvaguna-rajoguna-tamoguna, and so is the 
illusion of liberation. There is no bondage-liberation in Atmagnan. The 
person who dwells within his body, and considers himself to be the karta- 
bhokta* is bound; and the one who knows himself to be separate from his 
sense organs, and is aware of his status as a mere witness, has no bondage 
whatsoever. Both of these are not two - they are one and the same. During 
the period of illusion, it is called the jeeva, and when it is enlightened, it is 
called the Brahman. There is, however, no change of any kind in its intrinsic 
essence." 

The Lord continued, "You see, brother Uddhav, if you desire to possess Me, 
then listen - 

Na rodhayati maam yogo na saankhaya dharma e \a cha, 
Na svaadhyaayastapastyaago ne ^shtaapoorta na dakshinaa. 
11. 12. 1. ' 

I can never be controlled by Yoga-bhoga*, Sankhya, Dharma, Svaadhyay*, 
tapa, tyaga*, and dakshinaa*. None of these can win Me over. 

W3R^ Wl: ^WTWT % "TFT I I W.Vi.R. 
Yathaavarundhe^ satsangah sarvasangapaho hi maam. 
11. 12. 2. 

The one thing which can win Me, is Satsang, which results in abandoning all 
the worldly attachments undertaken after worldly attachments. It was due to 
Satsang, that the vulture, hunter, Ajamil, and Kubja obtained spiritual 
benefits. So, one should always have Satsang. Apart from Bhakti, obtained 
through Satsang, there is no other method for man's ultimate benefit. When 
a person endeavors - through Satsang - the result is that Bhakti enters his 
heart, and he is benefited." 

After this, the Bhagwat gives a unique episode, which is generally not found 
elsewhere. The Sanakadis went to Brahmaji one day. The Sanakadis are born 
enlightened. No Guru gave them Knowledge. Just as Vamdev attained 
enlightenment while still in the womb, the Sanakadis, too, were already 
enlightened when they were born. Actually, even the Virat Chaitanya* does 
not need a Guru; the Hiranyagarbha Chaitanya does not need a Guru, and the 



319 



Ishwara Chaitanya needs no Guru, either. The only one who needs a Guru is 
the ordinary jeeva. 

So, the Sanakadis placed this question before Brahmaji, "Father," they said, 
"Our mental condition has taken on the form of sense objects, because our 
mind focused on these objects. All the external sense objects we see, are 
seen because of the mental impressions which are the result of eons of 
tendencies. Sense objects are in the mind, and the mind is filled with sense 
objects. When we sit down and try to separate the mind from the objects, 
then neither do the objects leave the mind, and nor does the mind leave the 
objects. We tried to meditate till we were exhausted. Please tell us the secret 
of these two. How can they be separated?" 

At the time when the Sanakadis placed this question, Brahmaji was occupied 
with thoughts of which part of a jeeva's accumulated past actions should be 
used in the molding of his body. Since Brahmaji's intellect was occupied on 
this question, he was unable to provide the answer to Sanakadi's question. 
Then what happened? 

Sa maamachintayad de \ah prashnapaaratiteershayaa, 
Tasyaaham hansaroope ^nah sakaashamagamam tadaa. 
11. 13. 19. 

The Lord Shri Krishna said, "Uddhav, since Brahmaji found himself unable 
to answer the question placed by the Sanakadis, he began to think of Me. I 
took on the Hansavatara* and appeared before him. Everybody was amazed 
to see Me. Brahmaji came to Me, bringing his sons, the Sanakadis, and said, 
'Ko bhavaan?' (Who are you?)" 

Now, it should strike you, that the Hansa* is the Devta of vivek*. The 
specialty of a swan is its ability to separate water form milk. A swan is white 
- sattvik. True discrimination exists only in the satviktaa*. The vivek of a 
rajoguni is murky, because of the latent desires. A person with tamoguna 
lacks discrimination altogether; he is blind. So the Lord manifested as the 
white swan, which was a personification of discrimination. 
The Lord said, "When Brahma, and the Sanakadis asked, I answered by 
saying - 'Does your question refer to the Atma or to the body? All bodies 
are made of the five elements, like earth, etc. And they are experienced by 
sense organs, as sound, feel, appearance, flavor, and fragrance. So, the 
bodies of all are the same - what is there to question in that? If you wish to 
know what the Atma is, and who I am - then, the Atma of all, from an ant to 



320 



the Hirangyagarbha, to the Ishwara - is one. There is no differentiation, in 
the Atma, of a blade of grass, or Nature. 

So, neither can you ask about the Atma, because That - which is your Atma 
- is also My Atma. Nor can you ask about the body, because your bodies 
and Mine, are all made of the same panchabhootas. Actually, all are the 
same. So, why do you ask this meaningless question - 'Who are you?' 

Panchaatmake ^shu bhoote ^shu samaane ^shu cha vastutah, 
Ko bhavaaniti vah prashno vaachrambho hyanarthakah. 
11. 13. 23. 

Even so, if you are determined to get an answer to your question, then it is 
this: whatever is spoken by the tongue, whatever is heard by the ears, and 
whatever is seen by the eyes - it is all T, alone. Nothing exists, apart from 
Me. 

"fFTCTT oTERTT ^SJT T^S^m^^f: I 

Manasaa vachasaa drishtyaa grihyate ^nyairapeendriyaih, 
Ahame \a na mattonyaditi budhyadhvamanjasaa. 
11. 13. 24. 

The fact is that by focusing through the different sense organs, upon 
different subjects, you have attached your Self to these objects. You forget 
that it is the mind, which is the object of the senses, and the sense object is 
nothing but the mind. The mind can never be separated from the object. The 
only way to separate them is to leave both - *r^T 3*FT r^FfcT 'madroopa 
ubhayam tyaje^t'. You should merge your Atma into the Paramatma. Don't 
merge your Atma into the sense objects. Your sense objects are transient, 
inanimate, and exterior. The Atma is the conscious, the Chetan. So, let the 
Chetan be dissolved into the Chetan, become one with Me, and then discard 
all the objects of your senses from your Self. When you have done this, the 
question of separating your mind from its object will remain no more. The 
moment you recognize your Self as Me, everything will become My 
essence. 

Do not waste your spiritual effort in trying to separate objects from your 
mind. Instead, try to separate your Self from the objects and also the mind, 
and establish your Self in My essence - which is the Brahman." 



321 



The Lord Shri Krishna said, "Uddav, after removing the doubts of the 
Sanakadis in this way, I vanished before their eyes. The fact is that the 
devotion for Me is the highest Sadhana. Bhakti has two attributes. One is 
that it purifies the antahkaran of the person who has it, and improved his life. 
The second is that it gives information about the object of devotion. So, 
there is no other way, better than Bhakti, to purify one's life." 
Now, see - here lies the incomparable quality of the Shrimad Bhagwat. The 
tattvagnan in it is the same as in the Upanishads, the Brahmasutras and the 
Gita. The uniqueness of this is that - through Bhakti - it purifies our 
antahkaran from the standpoint of the Tvam padartha* and also provides the 
clarity of our own Self. Hence, the Bhakti presented by the Shrimad 
Bhagwat is useful for the jeeva. It links the jeeva to the Ishwara. 
When Uddhavji asked about the way to meditate, the Lord Shri Krishna said, 

3TRH 3TT#T: <HH=bWl ^TT^TI ^.^X.^. 
Sama aasana aaseena samakaayo yathaasukham. 
11. 14. 32. 

"Uddhav, a person should be comfortably seated on an asana*, when he 
meditates. The ground should be even. The asana will not be firm if the base 
is uneven. The asana which has been spread out, should also be even. One 
should not sit in a bending posture, with a drooping head, or with the head 
turned up. One should be absolutely erect, and chant the Omkara*. This 
ensures alertness, and helps to avoid lethargy and drowsiness." 
I have seen many people, whose heads loll, when they sit for mediation. 
Their breathing deepens. They say - we meditated for so long - but, what 
kind of meditation would they be doing? Breathing deeply is a sign of 
slumber, and the lolling head is a sign of drowsiness and a lack of alertness. 
Another name for Sadhana is vigilance. What spiritual effort can you do, if 
you become unwatchful? Knowledge disappears when one is unwatchful. 
So, one who wants to meditate successfully, should sit erect on an even 
asana, and concentrate on the image, that there is a lotus in the heart, with its 
head turned downwards. The head of the lotus should gradually be turned 
upwards through concentration, and its petals to be opened. The lotus bud 
should bloom. This is an eight petalled lotus. The eight petals symbolize the 
eight-fold Prakriti. In the center is the soft cushion of pollen. The nectar of 
the flower seeps out from the fragrant pollen particles. Meditate that the 
Lord is seated upon the soft, fragrant cushion of the lotus. One should not 
picture the Lord as an inanimate statue, either lying down, or standing. We 
should meditate upon a conscious Lord, looking lovingly at us, smiling 



322 



tenderly, and holding out His arms to embrace us. His heart is filled with an 
eager desire to benefit us. 

Many people tell me that they try to meditate, but are unable to do so. What 
is the reason? The reason is that the mind of the person is engrossed 
elsewhere. The Yoga Darshan* gives clear directions that when you sit for 
meditation, you should tell yourself firmly - 'O Sansara, O relatives, O 
body, you remain on earth. I am going to the Lord. If the Lord tells me to go 
to Vaikunth with Him, or to immerse myself in Him, or merge with Him, 
then I will not return to you. I am giving up everything which belongs to this 
world. I am abandoning everything which seems to be separate from the 
Lord. I sit down, to meet my Lord. ' 

As soon as you take this firm decision, you will see that your body becomes 
unmoving, your mind becomes focused, and you will be seated within the 
Lord. At present your condition is divided. You have tied a rope round your 
waist, which tugs you this way and that way. The Yoga Darshan calls it the 
W^T-#«T^T 'prayatna shaithilya*'. 

So, make your efforts more determined. You can meditate that before you is 
the hood of the Sheshnag, and you are mentally one with him. The Lord is 
asleep on your lap, and the hood of the Sheshnag is over your head. The 
Sheshnag is absolutely unmoving. If he moved, the earth would be rocked. 
You will see how well you can meditate, in this manner. 
What happens when a person mediates like this? f^uf 
^7Wrf^fra*T: ' Sanyaasyatyaashu nirvaanam dravyagnaanakriyaabhramah', 
which means that the illusion - that there are, in this world, other things and 
actions, apart from the Lord - is dispelled. If you can meditate properly for 
even two minutes, all your love for worldly objects will vanish completely. 
The world is experienced only when the mind is restless. When the mind is 
focused, one is unaware of the world. 

After this, the Lord Shri Krishna said, "Uddhav, when a person starts 
thinking of Me repeatedly, and meditate upon Me, then many kinds of 
Siddhis enter into his life. He can become light, heavy, spread himself, and 
obtain objects of desire. He can even control others. There are eight main 
Siddhis, and eighteen less important ones. Although these come, the 
Satpurush say that accepting them is an obstacle to attaining Me. 
The Sansara calls them Siddhis, but those who walk towards Me, consider 
them to be paltry. It is certain that there is no Siddhi, which is unattainable 
by the one who remembers Me, or does My Bhajan. However, all the 
Siddhis are an obstacle on the path to Me, i.e. for the purification of the 



323 



antahkaran, and the obtaining of tattvagnan - SRcTCPTR ci^fal antaraayaan 
vadantye^taa '! That is why the Mahatmas never accept them." 
Shri Krishna then described His Vibhutis* for Uddhav, just as He has done 
for Arjuna in the Gita. One is the naisargic* form and the other is the 
Vibhuti! One is His Vibhuti and the other is His Yoga. You read in the Gita, 
that the earth is the Lord's Yoga - 

E^tam vibhootim yogam cha maamyo ve^tti tattvatah, 
Soavikampe ^na yoge ^na yujyate " naatra sanshayah. 
10.7 

The lotus which blooms, the grains of food which grow, and the fragrance 
which spreads, are all the vaibhav* of the Earth. Water is the Lord's Yoga. 
The Lord is one, but the multitude of flavors are the Vibhutis of water. Fire 
is the Lord's Yoga, but the exquisite beauty seen in it, are the Vibhutis of 
fire. Thus, all the objects in the world have the Lord's Yoga and the Vibhutis 
in them. All the factors in the universe we see are the Yoga of the Lord, and 
the variety in them, is their glory. When a person begins to recognize the 
essence and wealth of the Lord, then he automatically establishes himself 
gradually in the Lord. The wealth he sees will be the Lord's wealth, and the 
essence he sees will be the Lord's essence. This way, he will see the Lord 
everywhere, and in everything. 

Then Uddhavji heard, from the lips of the Lord, descriptions about the 
Varnashrama Dharma*, Yama-niyama*, and Bhakti-Gnan-Karmayoga*. 
After listening to these, he asked a question about the number of tattvas that 
exist. He also placed some questions about the Sankhya philosophy. Both 
these are separate questions. Regarding the tattva, Uddhavji asked, "Lord, 
some Mahatmas say that there is only one essence, one element, one 
substance. Some say there are two, some again say three. Some, however, 
say four and some say five. Some say there are seventeen, and others say 
there are twenty eight tattvas. Some place the number at thirty six. Please tell 
me how many there really are." 

The Lord explained the reason for these contradictory statements, saying, 
"Uddhav, don't consider the people who decide upon the tattvas to be fools. 
Don't have doubts as to which is correct, and which is not. There are 
different methods for evaluating these things. According to them, one 
merges into another and the second merges into the third. From one 
viewpoint they are two, and form another, it is one. The Mahatmas have all 



324 



experienced the tattvas, and explained them by different methods. Say, for 
instance, that there is one Paramatma, and the other is Prakriti. Prakriti has 
three gunas. They have many permutations and modifications. Considering 
these factors, some calculate them as one tattva, some as two, and some as 
three. 

Sarvanyaayyam yuktimattvaad vidushaam kimashobhanam 

The viewpoints of the various learned men are rational from the relative 
stand point. Therefore, how can any viewpoint be regarded as unworthy?" 
Once, Shri Udiyababaji Maharaj asked me, "What is the sandhi* between 
the drashta* and the drishya*?" 

I replied, "Drishti*. One is the viewer; the other is the viewed, so the 

connecting link has to be the vision." 

Baba said, "Wrong." 

I asked, "Then what is right, Maharaj?" 

Baba said, "The ignorance of the essence of the one who views. If you 
understood the tattva form the angle of the oneness of Space and Time, then 
you would know that it is not the vision, but it is the ignorance of the 
essence of the viewer, which makes the viewed appear to be separate." So, 
everything stated by learned people is authentic, and has been stated due to 
certain reasoning. There is no need to argue and contradict. Any of the paths 
shown by a Mahatma can help you to attain the Lord. 
Uddhavji asked the Lord, "What is Sankhya?" 

"Sankhya is the count of the tattvas," replied Shri Krishna. "Come, let us do 
the counting. One is the karya. Start the counting from this point. The final 
karya are the panchabhootas. Some scientists claim that there are only four 
panchabhootas, some believe there are three, and some believe that there is 
only one Shakti. These opinions, however, are based on experiments done 
through instruments. We have five natural instruments: the ears to hear with, 
the skin to feel with, the eyes to see with, the tongue to taste with, and the 
nose to smell with. These five instruments are fitted into our bodies, and 
show us objects separately. Now, the basic elements absorbed by our five 
sense organs are: one, sound and the root of the ears; two, touch and the root 
of the skin; three, appearances and the root of the eyes; four, flavor and the 
root of the tongue; five, fragrance and the root of the nose. In the same way, 
the elements should also be five. These five basic elements - space (ether), 
wind, fire, water, and earth - should have their five basic tanmatras*. The 
shabda* tanmatra, the sparsha* tanmatra, the roop* tanmatra, the rasa* 



325 



tanmatra, and the gandha* tanmatra. All the forms and appearances in the 
world - whether they are of a tree, shrub, animals and birds, human beings, 
bad people and Mahatmas, the stars and constellations - all are made of the 
panchabhootas. Of these, millions of universes are formed. The 
panchabhhotas are greater. And, in comparison, the universes are like little 
eggs. 

All forms, all names and all species are imagined within the panchabhootas. 
Hence, the final karya is the panchabhoota. The five tanmatras, ahankara* 
and mahattattva*, which come in between, appear to be the action, when 
viewed by their cause; and when viewed by the action, appear to be the 
cause. So, one element becomes the action and the other element becomes 
both the action and the cause. 

There is one element which remains only the cause - it never becomes an 
action. For example, Prakriti is never the action - it is always the cause of 
everything. However, the elements are three - the cause element, the action 
element, and the action-cause element. The fourth object is the unattached 
witness, the conscious Atma, which illumines these elements. By using the 
calculation of Sankhya - about how Prakriti gives birth to Creation, and how 
Creation merges into Prakriti - our attachment to worldly objects is 
removed. This kind of meditation serves to destroy all attachments. It is this, 
which is called the 'anvay - vyatirek' (concomitance- variation) line of 
thought. Prakriti, being the cause, persists in all the effects which are 
evolved from it, and they finally merge into it. However, Prakriti may also 
exist by itself, without any of its manifested effects." 

Before this, the Lord Shri Krishna had answered Uddhavaji's questions 
regarding the Varnashrama Dharmas. "In My Paramatma form," explained 
the Lord Shri Krishna, "are the four Varnas and the four Ashrams. 
Knowledge about this world is obtained mainly through the ears, eyes, skin, 
nose and tongue. Hence, the castes which are created from My face, My 
head, are the Gnan-pradhan* castes, and are called Brahmins. In the same 
way, the castes born of My strong arms are called the Kshatriyas - whose 
arms are strong and who protect." 

This definition can be viewed in another way. The Virat Purusha*'s form - 
called Vaishvanara*, is the state of being awake. In it, are the Brahmachari 
and the Shudra. Higher than this is the Taijas Hiranyagarbha*, whose 
decision creates the world. This form contains the Vaishyas and the 
Grihasthas, who are predominantly good planners, organizers and decision 
makers. Above them are the Kshatriyas and the Vanaprasthas, who are 
ultimately immersed in the essence of the Pragya* form of the Lord, and the 
Ishwara. They have position and power, as well as a highly developed 



326 



intellect. Moreover, they are predominantly destroyers. Everything gets 
destroyed in them. Above this is the Turiya essence. The Turiya essence is 
predominated by Gnan - it is Knowledge itself. The Brahmins and Monks, 
therefore, are imagined within this essence, Turiya. And, as mentioned 
earlier, the Kshatriya-Vanaprasthas are imagined in the Ishwara and Pragya 
form. The Vaishyas-Grihasthas are imagined in the Taijas and 
Hiranyagarbha predominated forms. The Shudras-Brahmacharis are 
imagined in the predominantly Virat and Vaishwanara forms, to serve. 
All of them are the essence of the Paramatma. 

Now, if someone were to say, "Cut off the legs and let only the head 
remain," the man will become lame. If the legs were to be left, and the hands 
to be cut off, he would become useless. And if the head was cut off, there 
would be no life in the body. 

"The four Varnas (Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra), and the four 
Ashramas (Brahmacharya, Grihastha, Vanaprastha, and Sanyasi) are 
imagined in the Lord's quadruple form of Virat- Vishwanara, Hiranyagarbha- 
Taijas, Ishwara-Pragya, and Turiya-Brahmatattva. The dominating 
tendencies are: Knowledge for the Brahmins, strength for the Kshatriyas, 
planning for the Vaishyas, and work for the Shudras. Their Dharmas are 
dictated in keeping with the tendencies of each group in mind. There is, 
therefore, the Brahmin Dharma, the Kshtriya Dharma, the Vaishya Dharma, 
and the Shudra Dharma - but of these, none are smaller or greater. All four 
are parts of the body, and each has equal usefulness. It is not proper to say, 
"We don't want this part." Of what use our body be, without the organs of 
evacuation? So, all these parts belong to the body of the Paramatma, and 
they have been divided according to their innate tendencies, places of birth, 
and the original source from which they have emerged." 
The Lord Shri Krishna then spoke of the qualities a Brahmin should possess, 
including shama-dama*; the qualities a Kshtriya should have, including 
strength and courage; the wealth and luxury, keeping cows and trading skills 
a Vaishya should have, etc. Just as groups are made in accordance to 
people's aptitudes, these are divisions made by the Lord, in keeping with the 
natural tendencies. So, everybody should follow the dictates of his 
Dharma. 

The method described in the Shrimad Bhagwat, of how one's Dharma 
should be followed, is unique. It says, "Do all your work, but be watchful as 
to the motive behind it. Do everything for the sake of serving the 
Parameshwara, who abides in all forms; the Virat, Hiranyagarbha, Ishwara, 
the Parameshwara who is the Turiya. Adhere to your pure Dharma - with no 
selfish desires - by serving the Parameshwara. Don't adhere to your Dharma 



327 



for selfish motives or personal pleasures. Everybody should worship the 
Lord by following his Dharma as per his status in life. 

The Chaitanya in the Jeevatma is not separate from the Ishwara at all. So, a 
person who seeks the Lord with devotion, keeps to the tenets of his Dharma, 
and carries out his duties as a service to the Lord who is everybody's Atma, 
the Universal Atma, gets the supreme benefits. The Lord is in all forms, so 
even the trees and shrubs should be looked after, Service should be given 
even to animals and birds. The human beings and Devtas should also be 
served. One should serve water, not make it impure. The earth should be 
served - it should not be dirtied. Unclean objects should not be mixed in the 
rays of the sun and the moon. Even the wind should be kept pure. The sky 
should also be kept clean and pure. If you utter pure words, they will spread 
in the sky and purify it. Thus, the Bhagwat-Dharma, meditating upon the 
Lord, is for the purpose of purifying the individual as well as the whole. It 
gives the highest benefits. Those who fail to adhere to it get enmeshed in the 
world. Their path after death is quite different. 

There is a passage in the Bhagwat, where the question is raised that when 
everything is the form of the Paramatma, what is the logic of seeing good 
and bad qualities? The answer is that until the mind gives up its habit of 
viewing good and bad qualities, one should continue to follow the rules of 
Yama-niyama.*. Yama means satya*, ahimsa*, brahmacharya*, asteya*, and 
aparigraha*. The Yoga Darshan describes these five. The Bhagwat, 
however, describes twelve Yamas - ahimsa, satya, asteya, asangata*, lajja*, 
asanchay*, asatikta*, brahmacharya, maun*, sthirtaa*, kshama*, and 
abhay*. In the same way, twelve niyamas are given - shauch*, japa, tapa, 
havan, shraddha, atithi seva*, puja, teerthayatra*, paropakara*, santosh*, 
and Guru seva*. We should have Yama in our interaction with people, and 
practice niyama for personal purification. Asanas are for good health, and 
pranayama* is for controlling actions. Pratyahara* is for controlling the 
senses. Dharna* is for keeping only one object in mind, and Dhyan is for 
controlling the mind for a period of time. Samadhi is for immersing 
ourselves in a particular object. When our mind falls into utter darkness, 
tamoguna, it is called 'naraka'*. When sattvaguna rises in our life, that is the 
coming of Heaven - Wr ^ppfl^T: 'svarga sattvaguno day ah. ' 
In the Shrimad Bhagwat it is said that there is no need to go into lengthy 
descriptions about all these. So long as a person has the perception of good 
and bad qualities, and so long as the perceptions are not fully immersed into 
the Paramatma, you can take it that the fault of Maya lingers in them - 



328 



Gunadoshadrishirdosho gunastoobhayavarjitah. 
11. 19. 45. 

Sunahu taata maayaakrita guna aru dosha ane ^ka, 
Guna yaha ubhaya na de ^khiye \ de ^khiya so avive ^k. 

Our attention should be shifted, from seeing good qualities and faults in 
others. However, if we wish to develop good qualities in our own lives, we 
have to put in an effort. Just see - what is the subject of your study? Do you 
read sattvik books, or do you read rajasik-tamasik books? Which type of 
water do you imbue? Do you drink pure water or do you drink bottled 
water? What kind of people do you stay with? Which place do you stay in? 
Where were you born? What work do you do? What do you eat? Which 
mantra do you chant? What kind of sanskaras do you have? 
Through such introspection you can develop good qualities and actions in 
your life. Sattvaguna is increased by keeping the company of sattvik people, 
and their worship. He alone is considered sattvik whose possession of sattva 
is according to the scriptures and in keeping with the opinion of learned, 
elderly people. The one, who is made sattvik by a desire to work to appear 
sattvik, is not really sattvik. 

At this point, Uddhavji placed the question, "When there is only one basic 
essence, why have the rules of dos and don'ts been prescribed? Neither the 
rule, nor its exception, can be made without the perceptions of good and bad. 
Lord, You have preached to me that a good lifestyle comes form the 
viewpoint of goodness; and one gives up whatever is wrong by the 
knowledge of what is wrong for us. This has raised a doubt in my mind. 
Please Grace me by removing the doubt." 

Now, tomorrow you will get the reply about Uddhavji 's doubt, that even 
though there is only one Brahman, and only one Maya, and only one 
Prakriti, and only the common Panchabhoota; and even though the Jeevatma 
is Chetan, why have the divisions of good and bad been made? Only 
tomorrow will you be told of the Bhikshu-Gita, and the Paramartha 
propounded by Shri Shukadevji Maharaj, and also his beautiful sermon upon 
the Bhagwat Dharma. This lecture- Yagya has, somehow, to be completed 
tomorrow. 



329 



Om Shantih Shantih Shantih 



BHAGAWATAMRIT 



Pravarchan XIV 

(Skandha XI & XII) 

Yesterday we were discussing the question placed by Uddhavji. He asked 
Shri Krishna, "I find myself unable to swallow what You told me, about it 
being wrong to see the good and the bad tendencies in people; and that it is 
the highest of good qualities to not see these tendencies. The directions are 
given in the Vedas - do this, don't do this; this is good, this is bad; this is 
paapa and this is punya; and this gives Hell and this gives Heaven. However 
without separating the good from the bad tendencies, these statements do not 
tally, it all becomes illogical. So, how can this statement of Yours be of the 
highest benefit for people - foafoRT ^ #T ft^ifafeml-cK^ ? 'nishreyasam 
katham hye ^nam nishe ^dhavidhigocharam '? " 

The first point made by the Lord Shri Krishna in His reply is, "Uddhav, the 
vidhi-nishedh* you speak of, are not for separating the pleasures, objects, or 
actions. They apply to the Chetan* adhikari*. The materialists in the world 
use inanimate instruments to examine, observe and acknowledge the good 
and bad qualities of objects, saying, "this is poison" and "this is nectar". 
However, it is the same venom which becomes a curative medicine for 
some, and thus becomes elixir; while for others, even elixir acts as deadly 
poison. So, the qualities of an object cannot be the deciding factor about 
what is worth accepting and what is worth avoiding. 

Dharmaartham vyavahaaraartham yaatraartham iti chaanagha, 
Darshitoyam mayaachaaro dharmamudvahataam dhuram. 
11. 21. 4. 

The Vedas spell out the imagined differences (of good and bad) with five 
intentions. People should lead long, healthy lives, their interaction should be 
pure, religious rituals should be undertaken by them, their strengths should 
increase, and they should be able to make positive use of their strengths. The 
fact is that there is nothing unequal about items. 

Actually, everything is the Brahman, everything is Prakriti, everything is 
Maya, everything is panchabhoota*. Through the analysis of the tattva, the 



331 



actions can result in attaining particles, or energy, or the Parameshwara, or 
the Brahmatmaikya bodh*. You will never be successful in reaching the 
right conclusion if you try to discriminate between good and bad, through 
the properties of objects. That is why Yoga - while being established in non- 
differentiation - imagines the differences. 

Ve We «<2 naamaroopaani vishamaani same ^shvapi, 
Dhaatushooddhava kalpyante " e 7e ^shaam svaarthasiddhaye \ 
11. 21. 6. 

Yoga imagines the different names and forms, while retaining its condition 
of equanimity and oneness, so that all the different items may be made 
useful in our lives. 

This is why I stated earlier, that the person whose life contains indifference 
and detachment, and he has a desire to experience the Shantarasa, is suited 
for Gnanyoga*. The one who has an urge to change things and who has 
some avid desires - a wish to obtain something - is suited for Karmayoga*. 
And, the one who has neither strong detachment, nor strong attachment, is 
suited for Bhaktiyoga*. 

^rnfauui^TiHi cMkl'ifci obifaniH 1 1 

zp^zrr TR^STT^I" ^T: ^TR I 

Nirvinnaannaam gnaanayoge " nyaasinaamiha karmasu, 
Te ^shvarirvinnachittaanaam karmyogastu kaaminaam. 
Yadricchayaa matkathaadau jaatashraddhastu yah pumaan, 
Na virvinno naatisakto bhaktiyogosya siddhidah. 
11.20. 7-8. 

By external research, one can never reach the end of an object. The end of 
everything can be reached only by searching deep within ourselves, and 
knowing ourselves. As a matter of fact, the conch shell is a bone, and yet it 
is used to offer water to the Lord. Drums are covered with leather, but are 
taken into temples. An item which benefits a patient is seen to be avoided by 
a healthy person. A substance like ghee can be digested by a wrestler, and 
benefit him, but an invalid is given soup. Rich dishes like halwa-puri are not 
good for everybody. 



332 



The ability and expectation of a person has to be considered, to evaluate 
what he is fit for, and which items are suitable for him, depending upon his 
condition. Patented medicines are not always effective. The Vaidya* 
examines the patient, and then decides which treatment is needed. Arsenic is 
a medicine for some, and a snake may be poisoned by the milk it is given. If 
there is a large lake, then everybody can bathe and gargle in it, but if there is 
just a little water, it becomes jootha*. If there is a five quintal heap of flour, 
and a cat soils a portion, than people throw away the flour near the soiled 
portion, along with the cat's stool, and use the rest. However, if there is only 
a kilo or two of flour, and a cat soils it, it will all be thrown away. So, the 
stipulation of Dharma cannot be decided by considering only the item, 
strength, or action. 

In the end, Shri Krishna declared boldly, "The Vedas are endless, they are 
inexhaustible, and I am the only one who knows their full purport. Nobody 
else, but Me, knows the full purport of the Vedas. 

Kim vidhatte " kimaachashte " kimanoodya vikalpaye 7, 
Ityasyaa hridayam loke " naanyo mad ve ^da kaschana. 
11. 21. 42. 

Nobody but I knows the ruling of the shruti. Nobody knows fully who is 
named in the Vedas. Nobody knows what the Vedas translate, and what they 
superimpose - except Me. 

Maam vidhatte ^bhidhatte " maam vikalpyaapohyate " tvaham, 
E^tavaan sarvave^daarthah shabda aasthaaya maam bhidaam. 
Maayaamaatramanoodyaante^ pratishidhya praseedati. 
11.21.43. 

Uddhav, I tell you unequivocally, that the Shrutis affirm only the truth of My 
being, and on the basis of it, they posit distinction (as between the jeevatma 
and Paramatma). This distinction is repudiated later. The entire approach of 
the Shrutis is this - they initially speak of the distinction and later affirm that 
the difference is entirely an illusionary projection. All the differences are 



333 



mere perception; there is no real difference in the being. After negating the 
differences, the Veda-shruti itself becomes silent. 

See - there is no holy book in the world, belonging to any religious sect, 
which first described Dharma, and the Ishwara, and in the end, declares, 
"God is the only Truth. I am not the Truth." The Truth of the Vedas is, thus, 
quite different from other religious philosophies. 

After enumerating the tattvas, describing the separation of the Purusha- 
Prakriti*, giving the history of the 'titikshu Brahmin', explaining the 
Sankhya Yoga, and giving the description of the good, mixed and base 
tendencies, the Lord narrated the episode of Puroorva. He said, "Uddhav, 
Puroorva lost his senses due to his infatuation with Urvashi. Later, when he 
undertook atmachintan*, and developed discrimination, he said, "Oh! In 
spite of being a Chakravarti Samrat*, I have been reduced to becoming a 
plaything of this Apsara, this prostitute. The whole world used to bow at my 
feet. But, I would run, naked, after her; and she harassed me so 
much!" 

In the end, the Lord Shri Krishna said, "Uddhav, dussang is to be totally 
discarded, and satsang is best. No matter how much luxury, indulgence and 
attachment a person has, his heart will not be purified, until he gets satsang. 

Tato dussangamutsrijya satsu sajje ^ta buddhimaan, 
Santa e ^tasya cchindanti manovyaasangamuktibhih. 
11. 26. 26. 

The Seers, through their advice, make one understand that the self is entirely 
detached. Once the Self becomes entirely dissociated, it can not become 
conditioned by time, space, and objects. The reason is that it is 
consciousness which illuminates time, space, and objects. Therefore, the 
Atma, which is the illuminating consciousness, can not become conditioned 
by the entities which it illumines. The awareness dawns that the illuminating 
Atma - which is consciousness - is nothing but the non-dual 'Being', the 
Brahman. 

f^ri^r ^Rjfa w$?m: i 

Santo dishanti chakshooshi bahirarkah samuthitah, 

De \ataa baandhavaah santah santa aatmaahame \a cha. 

11. 26. 34. 



334 



When the sun rises, our eyes are able to have a direct vision of all external 
objects, but when one sees a Saint, one develops the eligibility for seeing the 
things hidden within. The Sant* is the Devta. The Sant is the brother, and the 
friend. The Sant is the Atma, and the Sant is the Paramatma. 
The person, who is unable to understand this, should worship Me. But first, 
he should find out what upasana* really is. One should learn the traditional 
method of doing upasana from a Teacher, and proceed accordingly. Upasana 
is not to be undertaken in a haphazard way, at one's whim and fancy. 
Upasana is done in the Sun, in fire, water, earth, a Brahmin, a cow - so 
much so that even a low caste person, even the Hiranyagarbha, any worm or 
moth, Nature itself, can be a symbol of the worship to Me, the Paramatma. 
The appropriate worship of the Sun is to chant the Vedas, and to worship 
fire, one should do a havan." 

After this, the Lord elaborated on how to worship what, and stated that one 
should offer food to every guest, show respect to a learned Brahmin, and 
feed green grass to a cow. "Thus, consider every creature to be My form, 
and show it due respect," said the Lord Shri Krishna. 

In the same way, the Paramatma is worshipped in one's own Atma. Just as it 
is a murder to kill another, it is also a sin to commit suicide - because our 
Atma is the same as another's! So, the Lord described the worship of one's 
own Atma, and said that we should give ourselves suitable comforts - 
■Hl'VicHHHicHrH 'bhogairaatmaanamaatmani. ' Even in the Gita, it is said that 
one cannot worship the Lord by torturing one's own Atma. 

Karshayantah shareerastham bhootagraamamache ^tasah, 

Maam chaivaantahshareerastham taanviddhayaasuranishchayaan. 

Gita 1 7. 6. 

Somebody asked a Mahatma, "How do we know whether the Lord is pleased 
with us or not?" 

The Mahatma replied, "If you are pleased with your indulgences, lifestyle, 
your activities, and your mental condition - then you can take it that God is 
pleased with you. God has not made any abode for Himself. Your 
antahkaran is His home. If your antahkaran is content, satisfied and in 
supreme bliss, then the Lord seated in your heart is also in supreme bliss. 
This is His place of contentment and fulfillment. So, give your body what it 
needs for it maintenance. Just as the Lord is satisfied by your offerings to 



335 



others, He can be satisfied by your giving your body what it needs. Animals, 
birds, humans, trees, creepers, and the earth - are all forms of the Lord. They 
are not inanimate, they are all Chetan. Nature is not inanimate - it is only the 
effect of Prakriti, which seems to be inanimate. 

The Shruti has made a promise (pratigyaa), that by knowing one thing, 
everything can be known. The Shruti supports this statement by citing the 
example of gold, and the ornaments made of gold. If gold is understood, all 
ornaments made of gold are as good as understood. But this statement of the 
Shruti will be negated if Prakriti is accepted as being entirely different from 
the Paramatma. In reality, the Paramatma and Prakriti are not distinct. They 
are one and the same 'Being'. 

The antahkaran is purified by worshipping the Lord with the conviction that 
there is none other than He. Then, one obtains Knowledge about Him. 
Shri Udiyababaji Maharaj used to chant these two shlokas of the Bhagwat - 

No stuveeta na ninde "ta kurvatah saadhvasaadhu vaa, 

Vadato gunadoshaabhyaam varjitah samadrin munih. 

Na kuryaanna vade 7 kinchinna dhyaaye 7 saadhvasaadhu vaa, 

Aatmaaraamonayaa vrityaa vicharejjadavanmunih. 

11.11.16-17. 

In these shlokas, too, the Lord Shri Krishna has preached to Uddhavji, 
"Don't think about good and bad, and don't do good and bad. A Mahatma 
should move about totally absorbed in the form of His Atma, which is the 
Paramatma." 

iKWHicic^rui *T WT^fT I 
fePfclJ^lcHcb WT ^^TT I I 

TOW* ^T: wrfcT ft^rT I 

Parasvabhaavakarmaani na prashanse ^nna garhaye 7, 
Vishvame ^kaatmakam pashyan prakrityaa purushe ^na cha. 
Parsvabhaavakarmaani yah prashansati nindati, 
Sa aashu bhrashyate^ svaarthaadasatyabhinive^shatah. 
11. 28. 1-2. 



336 



The Lord says that everything has its own nature. A scorpion stings, a snake 
bites, a cow gives milk, a tree bears fruit, the rivers flow, and the moon and 
sun shine. They all come into the world bringing their innate nature. One 
should neither praise, nor criticize them. 

Even if you look at it from the viewpoint of Prakriti, everything is one; and 
if you look at it from the viewpoint of the Atma, it is one, as well. A person, 
who gets involved in criticism and praise, is unable to think about the Atma, 
or about the Lord. Nor can he ponder upon the tattva of things. He gets so 
entangled with people's good and bad qualities that he forgets the 
Ishwara. 

A Mahatma had told me that all the creatures that exist have many good 
qualities, but they also have a couple of faults. Those faults are just like the 
black spot, called 'dithaunaa', which mothers apply to their children, to ward 
off the evil eye. This is why it is not worth looking at. Mahakavi* Kalidasa 
has said - 

E^kopi dosho gunasannipaate^ nimajjateendo kirane^shvivaankah. 

This means that a single fault is drowned, when there are many good 
qualities, just as the mark on the moon is drowned in the radiance of the 
moon. In the same way, the one who focuses only on fault, becomes filled 
with faults, and the one who focuses only on good qualities gets filled with 
good qualities. So - 

^T^uihhi^H 1hJ|J : HIcH<hTcKI I 

Pratyakshe ^naanumaane ^na nigame ^naatmasamvidaa, 
Aadyantabadasajgnaatvaa nisango vichare ^dihah. 
11.28.9. 

Pots, etc. are seen distinctly with our own eyes. When they break, their 
destruction, too, is seen by us. As the pot has parts, it is subject to 
destruction. Similarly, the earth's destruction can be inferred. However, the 
birth and destruction of the space is learnt from the scriptures, and through 
the experience of the Atma, we experience that nothings exists, apart from 
the Atma. So, instead of getting caught in things which have a beginning and 
an end, we should remain aloof, while living in this world. We should make 
a final conclusion that we are not attached to anything. There is no mental 



337 



burden for us to carry, when we become unattached. Non-attachment is our 
natural state, it is our natural form. 

Just as the decisive thought about the all-pervading Lord results in our self- 
surrender, so, too, does the dualistic world get negated with the knowledge 
of the Brahman. The method for this has been spoken of, explaining how a 
person should discriminate. One should separate the body from the Atma, by 
understanding their nature. So long as the Atma is mixed with the body, and, 
until this separation is achieved, a person remains trapped in the dos and the 
don'ts, the hell and heaven of the body, the attachments and aversions of the 
body, and the joys and sorrows of the body. 

The association of Mahatmas is for breaking these traps. However, if anyone 
tells you, "Come, I will make you free from old age, give you eternal life," 
don't get trapped by him. Because, ^ ^pf ^ sri^r "yadjanyam tad 
anityam ' - the forms which are created, are bound to get destroyed, but the 
Reality is neither created, and nor is it destroyed. Names are kept and 
changed, but the Reality is changeless. So, when the forms of Brahma- 
Vishnu were made, their life spans were fixed simultaneously. At the time of 
the destruction of Creation, the forms of Brahma- Vishnu-Mahesh get 
merged in the Ishwara. In the same way, when one obtains tattvagnan, and 
understanding replaces all the misunderstandings caused by ignorance, every 
seemingly different item merges into the Paramatma, in whom no 
differences exist. 

One of our Mahatmas had told me, that if you imagine the unchanging state, 
you can never succeed until you unite with the unchanging Paramatma. If 
you unite with that, which has kama, krodha, lobha, moha, shanti, shringara, 
adbhut, bibhatsa, then you can never attain an unchanging state. To attain an 
unchanging state, you have to become one with that, which is unchanging. 
The one who does not acknowledge the unchanging truth denies the 
Paramatma. 

So, instead of getting caught in the spinning wheel of Siddhis. Instead of the 
futile attempt to make the body immortal, you should undertake satsang, and 
vivek, and atmanubhuti*, to negate the duality seen in the world. To negate 
does not mean to eliminate, because the objects which appear, are mere 
perceptions. They are not the Reality. 

Uddhavji then said, "Sir, what You said - that we should not criticize 
anyone, nor eulogize anyone, and see everyone as one essence - this is 
extremely difficult for people to do. I think that it is very difficult indeed, to 
develop such an attitude. So, please show me a method which is very 
simple." 



338 



"Very well, Uddhav," said the Lord, "You have said what was in your heart. 
Now, listen. I will tell you, with great joy, something which is very simple. 
The best Dharma is - 

^rf?T ^jfuT ^f#T ^4 ?H%: I 

Kuryaat sarvaani karmaani madartham shanakaih smaran, 
Mayyarpitamanashchitto maddharmaatmamanoratih. 
11. 29. 9. 

My Bhakta should do everything for Me alone, and gradually think more and 
more about Me. By doing this, his heart and mind will, in a few days, be 
totally offered up to Me. 

^Wfajf ^|o|i|dls^RT?TI 

Iti sarvaani bhootaani madbhaave ^na mahaadyute \ 
Sabhaajayan manyamaano gnaanam ke \alamaashritah. 
Brahmane " pulkase " ste «e ' brahmanye Vke " sfulingake \ 
Akroore " kroorake " chaiva samadrik pandito matah. 
Nare^shvabheekshanam madbhaavam punso bhaavayatochiraat, 
Spardhaasooyaatiraskaaraah saahankaraa viyanti hi. 
11. 29. 13 -15. 



Uddhav, only that sadhak, who takes recourse to the gnanadrishti*, sees Me 
in all creatures and objects, and has equanimity towards a Brahmin, 
Chandal, thief, the Sun, a spark of fire, and compassionate and cruel people, 
should be considered a true Gnani. When the attitude is cultivated to 
consider all men and women as My forms, then in a few days the sadhak's 
negative feelings - like competitiveness, envy, disdain, pride, etc. - are 
removed. 

Look - even in the Gita, the Lord has said, "He who sees Me in all creatures, 
and sees all creatures in Me, is a Yogi. He is a samadarshi*. 



339 



Sarvabhootasthamaatmaanam sarvabhootaani chaatmani, 
Eekshate " yogayuktaatmaa sarvatra samadarshanah. 
6. 29. 

So, see Me, the Parameshwara, in all. And see also, that none are in Me - 
cRf^T cJ?r dT^ftq: 'vadanti tat tattvavidah '. I am the Ishwara, I am the jagat*. 
It is My one form of Truth - the Satya-swaroop - which is in everything. 
What is Satya*? The akhanda-satta*, which is in everything, which is the 
experienced, indivisible Self, is called the Satya. 

The person, who develops a feeling of the Satya, will have no desire to 
compete with anyone. He will never try to achieve greater worldly success 
than others. He will never be inclined to see faults in the good qualities of 
others, and he will never reject anyone. His ego will be annihilated. 
Uddhav, the easiest method is to have the conviction that I am in the heart of 
all creatures. The person who develops Bhagvadbhava* should experience 
that the flower worships the Lord with its beauty and fragrance. This earth, 
and all its fragrances, is engrossed in the worship of the Lord. All the rasas 
of water are engrossed in worshipping the Lord. The total brightness in the 
world is engrossed in the illumination of the Lord. The wind touches the 
Lord in worship. The sky worships the Lord through the sounds in it. All the 
objects of worship are the Lord, and it is He, who is worshipped by them. 
You are experiencing, within yourself, this elixir, so do not have any 
feelings of differentiation. 

My friend, the Brahmin, the butcher, the thief, the Sun, he spark of fire, the 
cruel and the kind, are all involved in a 'khel'*, - let it go on. A game is, 
after all, a game. 'Khe' means the sky, the void, the Brahman. So, # 
'khe^ leeyate^ means the whole play will vanish in the sky, the void, the 
Brahman. 

Ultimately, all this is the imagination of the mind. It is a picture upon an 
imaginary wall. It is a frolic of the Parabrahma Paramatma. It is the 
exuberance of the Atma. The one, who views it with equanimity, is called a 
Pandit. The meaning of Bhaktibhava is - "See, this is Shyam, this is Shyam, 
Shyam, only Shyam!" If the Lord is not seen everywhere, where is the 
Bhakti? That is why it is the tendency to see the Lord in everything, which is 
called the Bhagwat Dharma. And, if this somehow enters the life of a 
person, then you may take it that the Bhagwat Dharma has descended. 
However, if somebody is running away from an attacking dog, and the 
feeling rises in his heart, "I will run to the Lord, and embrace His feet," then 



340 



his effort to escape from the dog is also the Bhagwat Dharma. In Bhakti, the 
cause is not the most important aspect. Neither is the action. The important 
aspect is the intention behind the action. In the Smart Dharma, it is the 
eligibility of the person which is important, but in the Bhagwat Dharma, it is 
the intention which is important. The person who can bring the Bhagwat 
Dharma into his daily life becomes fit to receive the highest good." 
In the end, the Lord told Uddhav, "When a person folds his hands and turns 
towards Me, surrendering himself to me, at that very moment, all his duties 
end, and My duties begin." 

Martyo yadaa tyakttasamastakarmaa nive ^ditaatmaa vichikeershito me \ 
Tadaamritatvam pratipadyamaano mayaatmabhooyaaya cha kalpate " vai. 
11.29.34. 

r^chl^d) ^ 'Vichikeershito me"- means fafw w^'- 'vishistam kartum 
ishtah', meaning, "I desire to make him especially refined. Then, he 
becomes one with Me, he sees through My eyes, hears through My ears, and 
thinks through My intellect. He has no ears of his own, nor a nose, nor his 
own eyes." 

Look, Sir. You will remain unhappy as long as you have a difference of 
opinion with God. Your sorrows come when you disagree with the Lord. All 
sorrows end, the moment you agree with Him. 

Uddhavji was deeply moved by the Lord's sermon. He simply did not want 
to leave Him. His eyes brimmed with tears and his body tingled with love. 
He fell repeatedly at the feet of the Lord Shri Krishna, but Shri Krishna 
desired to fold up His Leela. So, Uddhavji obeyed the Lord's command to 
go to Badrinath. 

Shri Krishna was eager to end His play. At His advice, the Yaduvanshis 
decided to move to the curse-free Prabhas Kshetra*, since the curse would 
cause upheavals at Dwarka. The Chandrama had been liberated from 
Daksha's curse, at the Prabhas Kshetra. 

How surprising was the decision, that liberation from their curse would not 
be possible in Dwarka, a city established by the Lord; and that it would be 
possible by going to the Prabhas Kshetra! Their faith in the Lord was absent, 
they had faith in the Prabhas Kshetra! 

However, this was as per the Lord's wishes. So, when they went to the 
Prabhas Kshetra, everybody had the ritual bath, and did the oblations. When 
it was time to eat, however, no one knows what all they ate and drank - 



341 



TffccrT cTR^f? 'bhuktvaa peetvaa cha vaaruneem'. Their thinking was 
deluded, and they began to quarrel amongst themselves. They formed into 
several groups. Since they had no weapons with them, they started to pull 
out tufts of the erka grass, and attack each other with it. 
Balaramji and Shri Krishna tried to explain that they shouldn't fight. When 
the thinking is negative, however, even a well-wisher seems like an enemy. 
So, these people began to attack even Rama-Krishna. Then. Rama-Krishna 
retaliated by also using the erka grass to kill them. The time of destruction 
was at hand. All of them died then and there. Shri Krishna saw His sons and 
grandsons killed before His eyes. 

As mentioned earlier, Uddhav went to Badrinath at the command of Shri 
Krishna. Only Aniruddha's son, Vajranabh remained at Dwarka. When 
everyone was killed at the Prabhas Kshetra, Balaramji went into a Samadhi, 
and gave up his body in a cave called the Sheshgufa, which can be seen even 
today. Shri Krishna sat down under a Peepal* tree, with one foot crossed 
over another. The hunter, Jara, mistook it for a deer, and shot an arrow into 
the sole of the Lord's foot. Jara means old age. This hunter, Jara, chases 
everybody. 

Amongst the Jains, it is well known that everybody has to bear the fruits of 
their actions. The Jains do not believe in the Ishwara. They consider 
everybody to be a jeeva. They do not accept five things - the Ishwara, the 
Vedas, the Brahmins, the Yagyas with the fire worship, and purity by 
bathing at Pilgrimages. They say that even Rama-Krishna, and others, have 
to suffer the fruits of their actions. It was the same Bali, who Shri 
Ramachandra had shot from behind a bush, who was born as Jara, to shoot 
an arrow into Shri Krishna's foot. 

This logic, however, can be true for a jeeva, but not for the Ishwara. The 
Ishwara does not suffer the fruits of His actions. The Lord Shri Krishna has 
stated in the Gita, 

Na maam karmaani limpanti na me " karmafale " sprihaa, 
Iti maam yobhijaanaati karmabhirna sa badhyate\ 
4. 14. 

This means that the Ishwara is the abhokta* of the karmafal*. Even he who 
obtains this knowledge, becomes free of the fruits of his actions. 
Shri Shukadevji Maharaj says, "Parikshit, you know that the Lord Shri 
Krishna had summoned the dead son of His Guru, and restored him alive to 



342 



his parents. You know He saved you from the Brahmastra, even after you 
were burnt by it. Why did He not save and keep His body? The Lord 
thought, "If I keep My body, than the people in the world - the Saints, 
Mahatmas, and Gnanis - will say, 'We should also keep our bodies.' Their 
attachment to their bodies will linger, whereas the ideal is that they should 
not even attempt to preserve their bodies". 

wspt ifm % wwiiri miton 1 1 

Tathaapyashe ^shasthitisambhavaapyaye ^shvananyahe ^turyadashe 
^chashaktidhrik, 

Nacchat prane^tum vapuratra she^shitam martye^na kim svasthagatim 

pradarshayan. 

11. 31. 13. 

After this, is described how Shri Krishna's chariot and horses flew away. 
Lord's weapons also went with them. He had explained to His charioteer, 
Daruk, about going to Dwarka, and informing Vasudevji, Ugrasen and the 
others. Daruk did as the Lord instructed. The whole city was in an uproar. 
Balaramji's wives became Satis* with his body. Shri Krishna's wives did 
not obtain His body, so they could not become Satis with Him. Their bodies 
caught fire individually. 

You see, the Lord's body can be viewed from three angles. One, from the 
bhautik (worldly) level, a second from the adhidaivik level, and the third 
from the adhyatmik level. From the spiritual aspect (the Adhyatmik level), 
He is everybody's Atma - 3hichh 3q%^ncCRFT 'aatmaanam akhilaatmanaam '. 
Birth and death don't touch Him. From the subtle aspect (Adhidaivik level), 
His body is divine, Self-effulgent, propitious, and people obtain benefits by 
meditating upon it. The divine body cannot be burnt, and that is why He did 
not burn it, and took it with Him, when He went to His own land. 

Lokaabhiraamaam svatanum dhaaranaadhyaanamangalam, 
Yogadhaaranayaagne yyaadagdhvaa dhaamaavishat svakam. 
11.31.6. 

From the worldly angle (the Bhautik level), there are many kinds of stories 
about the Shrivigraha* of the Lord Shri Krishna, to be found in the Puranas. 
The Padmapurana says that the Lord's body was carried by the sea, to 



343 



Jagannathpuri. The tribals there caught, and worshipped it, and the King, 
Indradyumna, made the Jagannath temple for that body. You can read the 
story in the Mahatmya* of the Neelachalpuri. 

Tapahshareere " raamasya vaasude \asya chobhayoh, 
Anvishaya daahayaamaasa purushairaaptakaaribhih. 

Thus, there were three kinds of fates of the body of the Lord; the gross, the 
subtle, and the spiritual. From all three viewpoints, the Lord established His 
body - which bestows good fortune to the whole world - in the hearts of 
people, and then departed for His supreme abode. 

The twelfth Skandha starts after this. In this, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj has 
named and described several Kings of Kaliyuga, and explained how 
adharma* had increased. 

Then, explaining how we can save ourselves from the evils of Kaliyuga, Shri 
Shukadevji Maharaj told King Parikshit, 'Even though the Kaliyuga is a 
storehouse of evils, it has one great virtue. The virtue is that one can obtain 
the Paramatma by merely chanting and singing the name of Shri Krishna. In 
the Satyayuga, people had to meditate. In the Tretayuga, they had to worship 
through Yagyas; in the Dvaparyuga, they had to do ritual worship. In the 
Kaliyuga, however, a person can get the same results by merely singing with 
devotion. 

^IcHl^ ^WM: -qt pf^cT 1 1 

^ ^TRrfr fspajj ^rTFTT ^cft ^f: I 

Kale Vdoshanidhe " raajannasti hye ^ko mahaan gunah, 
Keertanaade \a krishnasya maktasangah param vrate 7. 
Krite " yad dhyaayato vishnum tre ^taayaam yajato makhaih, 
Dvaapare^ paricharyaayaam kalau tadharikeertanaat. 
12. 3. 51-52. 

You see, Rajashray* is also the Paramatma. Dharmashray* is also the 
Paramatma. Kalashray* is also the Paramatma, and Pralayashray is also the 
Paramatma. 

Shri Shukadevji Maharaj told Parikshit about four kinds of pralays - one is 
nitya* parlay, the second is naimittik* pralay, the third is the prakrit* pralay, 



344 



and the fourth is the atyantik* pralay. Moksha is the name of the atyantik 
pralay. However, Moksha does not come and go from some place, nor does 
anything happen. It is nitya-mukta*. 

I once asked Shri Udiyababaji Maharaj, "Maharaj, between jeevanmukti* 
and videhamukti*, which is greater?" 

Baba replied, "Look, brother, neither is greater. What happens is that with 
the destruction of ignorance, one abides as the Self-revealing Consciousness, 
which is non-different from the Brahman. This abidance in one's natural 
State - which is the sub-stratum of all that exists - is termed as liberation. 
So, there is nothing to be attained, really. There is only abiding in the natural 
State, as brought about by the destruction of ignorance." 
Parikshit attained this absolute liberation when Shri Shukadevji Maharaj 
ultimately gave him this sermon - 

V$ ^q^MlcHHHIcH^II«TFT fasfld I I 

Aham brahma param dhaama brahmaaham paramam padam, 
E\am sameekshanannaatmaanamaatmanyaadhaaya nishkale\ 
Dashantam takshakam paade^ lelihaanam vishaananaih, 
Na drakshyasi shareeram cha vishvam cha prithagaatmanah. 
12. 5. 11-12. 

"Parikshit, do thou contemplate on the real meaning of the term 'Tvam' - 
which is the same as 'Aham' - the pure, consciousness which witnesses. 
This witnessing consciousness is identical with the Supreme Reality, which 
is non-dual, and is the sub-stratum of the entire creation. You are that non- 
dual Being. 

Do thou resolve - 'That I Am', 'I Am That'. It is not as though your Being is 
contained in the Brahman, or that the Brahman is contained in your Being. 
Both are actually one, non-different from each other. 

Do thou understand that the Supreme Being is You, and You are the 
Supreme Being. It should not be thought that they get mixed up, and become 
one. Neither does the Jeeva get mixed up with the Ishwara, nor does the 
Ishwara get mixed up with the Jeeva. In reality, both are a single liberated 
Being. 

Parikshit, do thou contemplate on the Self, and experience the oneness of the 
Self with the Brahman. 



345 



Now, the takshak - whether he be called the Vishwakarma*, or Kala (Time), 
or a serpent, who scrapes, cuts, and sets the world right - may come and bite 
your foot. You will not be aware of any sensation. Your experience will be 
such that you will not view the body, and the world, as being distinct from 
the Self, the Consciousness" 

After giving this sermon, Shri Shukadevji Maharaj asked King Parikshit, 
"Well, Dear, have you listened attentively to all I said, and has your 
ignorance been dispelled?" 

Parikshit replied, "Yes, Maharaj, my ignorance is dispelled. You instructed 
me in knowledge and experience, about the absolute Parabrahm Paramatma, 
and carried me across the darkness of nescience. Now I am merging the 
mind, and speech, in the Self - 

mri ^ ftror ^ *infa*inrH»64i i 

"RcfcfT #TcT 8^T TOT: WTI I ^.^.Vs. 
Agnaanam cha nirastam me ' gnaanavignaananishthayaa, 
Bhavataa darshitam kshe ^mam param bhagavatah padam. 
12. 6. 7. 

After these words, Parikshit did a ritual worship of Shri Shukadevji Maharaj, 
who then took his leave and departed at once. Parikshit seated himself in a 
Yogic posture, on the bank of the Ganga, and began to meditate upon the 
Lord. Kala is always attached to everything which is born, in this world. So, 
the takshak came and bit him. This caused his body to turn into ashes. 
However, his body had already been reduced to the status of ashes by the 
gnanagni*. 

Now see, Raja Parikshit 's body had already been burnt by the Brahmastra, 
and the Lord had saved him at that time. This time, when Parikshit' s body 
was burnt by the verbal Brahmadandastra* of the Brahmin, he was saved by 
the Shrimad Bhagwat. However, when a body is burnt by gnanagni, the 
remains are not burnt by fire. So, Raja Parikshit was burnt by a divine fire. 
The verbal curse was countered with words. Raja Parikshit thus attained 
liberation. 

The Suta-Shaunak dialogue begins after the departure of Shri Shukadevji 

Maharaj. Sutaji says that when Parikshit 's son did the Sarpa-yagya*, and the 

takshak began to burn in it, then Vrihaspati stopped it. 

Then, at Shaunakji's request, Sutaji explained how the Vedas were divided, 

and how their various branches were formed, and how they continued and 

survived. 



346 



In-between, there is an episode about some violence done by 
Vaishampayana. Instead of undertaking the Prayashchita* himself, he asked 
his disciples to undertake it on his behalf. They began to do the penance. 
Just then, Vaishampayana' s other disciple, Yagyavalka said, "Guruji, these 
students are like little partridges and quails - what penance will they do? I 
am a disciple of yours, with the requisite ability, and will undertake the 
penance by myself." This annoyed Vaishampayana. He rebuked 
Yagyavalka. "You think that these Brahmin, Brahmachari students of mine 
are to be disdained, and you are showing them disrespect! Go - none of the 
learning I have imparted to you will be of any use to you. Leave all the 
learning you have acquired from me." Yagyavalka obeyed his Guru, and 
gave up everything he had learnt from him. After that he took up ascetic 
worship, ritual worship and prayers. The Sun was pleased, and gave 
Yagyavalka a sermon of mantras which were not known to others. The 
branches of the Yajur Veda started from these. 

After this, Sutaji answered Shaunakji's questions, describing the Lord's 
physique, ornaments, and weapons. "The feet of the Purush* form of the 
Lord, are the earth," he said. "The head is the svarga*, the nabhi* is the sky, 
the eyes are the Sun, His nose is the wind, and His ears are the directions. 
Upon His chest, the Lord wears the jeev-chaitanya* in the form of the 
Kaustuv mani, and wears the radiance of the spirit in the form of the 
Shrivatsa*. His garland is the Maya. His pitambar is the metre, and the 
yagyopavit is the pranav*. His earrings are the forms of the Sankhya-yoga, 
and in the form of His crown, He wears the Brahmaloka. It is the primordial 
Nature which is His Sheshshaiya, and His lotus-like naval has the excellent 
qualities like Dharma, gnan, etc. 

Similarly, His mace, called Kaumodaka, is the form of the essence of the 
spirit. His conch shell, called Panchajanya, is the form of the essence of 
water; and the discus He hold, called the Sudarshan chakra, is the essence of 
brightness. His sword is the form of the clear sky; His shield is the form of 
ignorance. His bow, called Sharang, is the form of Time (or death), and His 
quiver is the form of action. The senses are His arrows, and the mind which 
is filled with the power to act, is His chariot. 

The places where He can be worshipped are the Sun, or the fire. The 
purification of the four- fold mind is the mantra-diksha*, and to destroy all 
sins is His worship. 

Sutaji thus elaborated to Shaunak and other Rishis, about the rules of 
worshipping the Lord, who is Laxmipati, as described in the Pancharaatra, 
and other tantras. 



347 



At Shaunakji's request, Sutaji started narrating the story of Markandeya 
Rishi. He said that Markandeya, the son of Mrikand Rishi, was worshipping 
the Lord. He had no desires of any kind. The fact is that when a person 
wants the Lord to fulfill some desire, he considers the object of his desire to 
be more important than the Lord. It is not a sign of respect, that when the 
Lord appears before a person, the person asks for some toy, instead of asking 
for the Lord, Himself! 

Markandeyaji had no desire whatsoever, but when the Lord Nara-Narayana 
appeared before him, and told him to ask for a boon since He was pleased 
with Markandeyaji' s stuti. Markandeyaji prayed, "Sir, I have obtained Your 
vision, and desire nothing else. However, I want to see what Your Maya is. 
Please grace me with a glimpse of Your Maya." 

The Lord was quite surprised to hear Markandeyaji' s request. However, He 
said, "All right, you will have a glimpse." 

One evening, Markandeyaji sat on the bank of the river Subhadraa, to do the 
evening Sandhya Vandan worship. It seemed to him that the sea was rising 
on all sides, coming towards him, flooding everything in its path. The water 
reached him and swept him away, but he did not die. He saw the whole 
world submerged in water. Sometimes, some creatures of the sea would 
swallow him, and sometimes some other creatures would swallow him, but 
they would throw him out again. He wandered thus for several millions of 
years. Ultimately, he saw an island with a Banyan tree on it, and he saw a 
tiny baby sleeping on a cupped leaf of the tree. 

Now, see one thing stated by the Lord, in the form of the Vedas. He says, 
"Oh, Humans! This village of yours is balanced on the peepal tree, and your 
lifespan is just alike a drop of water on a leaf, which may fall any minute." 
Now, Markandeya saw that the baby was sucking his own big toe. The 
Mahatmas have said, about this, that the baby was the Lord Balgopal* 
Himself. He was sucking His big toe, to check what sweetness it has, which 
makes people drink the water touched by it. 

When Markandeyaji went close to this baby, he was sucked in with the air, 
when the baby took a breath. Inside, he saw hundreds of thousand of 
universes. So much so, that he even had a glimpse of the Subhadraa river, 
and his own Ashram. He saw himself sitting in meditation. Then he emerged 
again, when the baby exhaled. When he went to bow down to the baby, he 
realized that there was no baby, and no other scene. He was back at the same 
spot, on the same day, at the same time, as when he started his Sandhya 
Vandan. 

Markandeyaji thought, "Oh, what was all that which I saw?" Then he 
understood that it was the play of Maya, which he had seen. Maya hid the 



348 



Paramatma, hid the truth, and showed - like a magic show - that, which did 
not exist. Markandeyaji was wonderstruck. He became engrossed in the 
prayers and meditation of the Lord, again. 

One day, the Lord Gauri-Shankar passed Markandeyaji. Seeing him, Gauriji 
said, "See how this learned Brahmin is doing severe asceticism. Let us go 
and grant him a boon." When they went close, Markandeyaji was 
meditating, and did not see them. Shankarji's sankalpa broke his meditation. 
When Markandeyaji opened his eyes, he saw the Lord Gauri-Shankar 
standing before him. He bowed down to them, worshipped and eulogized 
them. Shankarji told him to ask for a boon. Markandeyaji said, "Sir, I once 
asked for a boon, and saw such a play of Maya, that I suffered badly. What 
boon can I ask for now? Even so, please grant me the boon that I should 
always have unflinching Bhakti for the Lord, for you, and for the 
Mahatmas." 

The Lord Shankar was very happy, and granted all three boons. Over and 
above them, he bestowed one more. "You will live long, and you will 
become a Puranacharya*" 

Sutaji then listed the subjects in the Shrimad Bhagwat, and spoke about the 
numbers of shlokas in the Puranas. Then he said - 

Sarvave ^ daantasaaram yad brahmaatmaikatvalakshanam, 
Vastvadviteeyam tannishtham kaivalyaikaprayojanam. 
12. 13. 12. 

The Shrimad Bhagwat contains the essence of the Vedanta. What is the 
essence of the Vedanta? What is its definition? The essence and the 
definition of Vedanta is the fact that the Brahman and the Atma are one. Is 
there any dualism in the forms of actions and attributes? No, Oh, no! It is an 
indivisible object, which has no connection to duality, whatsoever. All right, 
does it contain Sayujya*, etc? No, there is only Kaivalya*. The purpose of 
the Bhagwat is to achieve the state of Being, nothing except total liberation, 
immediate liberation, and the knowledge that our Being is ever free. This is 
the total, conclusive purport of the Shrimad Bhagwat. Even so, it is said - 

SARTOR % I 

Sarvave^ daantasaar am hi shreebhaagavatamishyate\ 
Tadrasaamritatriptasya naanyatra syaadratih kvachit. 



349 



12. 13. 15. 



If anyone develops a love for the Shrimad Bhagwat - which is the essence of 
all the Vedas and Vedanta - if he finds fulfillment in the nectarine purport, 
then he will no longer be attracted to anything worldly. He will not be 
trapped in the play of the world. He will, of course, become detached from 
the world; and he will certainly obtain the love for the Lord. Furthermore, he 
will lose interest in all other Shastras and love only the Shrimad Bhagwat. 
In the end, Sutaji told Shaunakji and the other Rishis, that the Shrimad 
Bhagwat is that tilak of all the Puranas. It is the supreme wealth of the 
Vaishnavas. Moreover, it contains the discovery of the naishkarmya*, as 
well as Gnan-Bhakti-Vairagya*. cT^pcR foR3^T ferR^FRt ' Tacchrinvan 
vipathan vichaaranaparo ' - the one who listens to it, reads, it and thinks 
about it, obtains Bhakti for the Lord, and gets liberated. 
Nobody can understand the Shrimad Bhagwat through the grammatical 
meanings. It is understood only through Bhakti - 

*l^7T qTWT TITfFT ^T«7T#T H feRT I 

Bhaktyaa bhaagavatam graahyam naabhyaase ^na na vidyayaa. 

If someone desires to grasp the purport of the Shrimad Bhagwat through 
study or practice, he will never succeed. The Shrimad Bhagwat is only 
Bhaktigrahya* - it can be assimilated only if the person has devotion for the 
Lord. 

After this, Shri Shukadveji is saluted along with the Lord. Shri Shukadevji 
Maharaj is engrossed in his own supreme bliss, and there is no duality in 
him. He was prompted by compassion to narrate the Shrimad Bhagwat, and 
the purpose was the good of people. 

Compassion arose first in the heart of the Lord Narayana, and He lectured 
Brahmaji about it. Then the Lord entered Brahmaji, and through Brahmaji, 
lectured Narad about it. Then, taking the form of the Bhagwat, He entered 
Naradji, and Narayana Himself became Narad. Then - in the form of Narad 
- the Lord Narayana lectured Vyas about it. And Vyas, who had merged into 
the essence of the Bhagwat, became Narayana. Then, the Lord Narayana - in 
the form of Vyas, lectured Shri Shukadevji. Thus, Narayana adopted many, 
many forms, to narrate the Shrimad Bhagwat Mahapurana. Finally, 
Shukadevji narrated it to Parikshit (also the essence of the Lord), whose 
Atma had been pervaded by Shri Krishna Himself, at his death. The Shrimad 
Bhagwat is, thus, the prime jewel amongst all the Puranas. 



350 



It is a tradition to chant these two verses, at the end of each session of the 
discourse on the Shrimad Bhagwat - 

^ ^TSTT 'qf^T: MK±ilw°l ^TF7?T I 

Bhave^ bhave^ yathaa bhakti paadayostava jaayate\ 
Tathaa kurushva de \e ^sha naathastvam no yatah prabho. 
Naamasankirtanam yasya sarvapaapapranaashanam, 
Pranaamo dukhashamanastam namaami harim param. 
12. 13. 22-23. 

"Lord, You are my Master. Grace me that I may have Bhakti for Your feet in 
my heart, in every birth I take. Because, I am Your servant. 
I bow down to the Lord, Shri Hari, whose name, when chanted, destroys 
everything inauspicious. All sorrows are destroyed by listening to the names 
of the Lord, or by describing them, or by chanting them. The sins are 
destroyed by speaking the name; and the sorrow - which is the fruit of the 
sins - is destroyed by bowing down to the Lord. Paapa-nasha* through 
nama-sankirtan*; and prarabhda-nasha* and dukha-nasha* through 
pranama* - iter me Hat kathina kuanka bhaalake " '. " 

The removal of the misfortune and poverty - which is the preordained fate 
of a person - can also be achieved by bowing down at the feet of the Lord. 
The name of the Lord destroys sin, and also the sorrow which comes as its 
fruit. 

So come, let us bow down thrice to the Lord Shri Hari, and chant - 
cT ^f#T # WT ! cT ^f#T # WT ! ! cT ^f#T # WT ! ! ! 

7am nammami harim param! Tarn namaami harim param!! Tarn namaami 
harim param!!! 

Now, I say two things more, to all of you. The organizers of this Satsang - 
Shri Laxminivasji Birla and his wife - have chosen such an excellent topic, 
that I experienced great joy in speaking about it. I believe that all of you 
have also enjoyed the discourse upon the Shrimad Bhagwat, since you are 
also forms of my Atma. The sound vibrations which were spread in the 
atmosphere have spread joy all around. The speaker and the listeners, all got 
an opportunity to listen and think about the Lord. 



351 



Despite some discomfort, you have all listened very quietly. You left the 
excellent furniture of your homes, and sat on the grass. You were unshaken 
by the high winds and the dust it raised. Perhaps some of you were bitten by 
an insect from the grass you sat on, but you endured it quietly. The 
inconveniences you endured, were your tapasya, which you undertook, to 
listen to the Shrimad Bhagwat. So, I am grateful to you, that - with you as 
the instrument - a little of my time was used for the Lord, and for the 
Bhagwat, and my speech could be utilized for a good cause. 
It is to your credit, and it is your greatness, that you made me sit on an 
elevated seat, while you sit at a lower level, to listen to the Shrimad 
Bhagwat. The one who sits on a higher seat is not the greater person. The 
greater person is the one who gives the higher seat to another. That person's 
magnanimity deserves praise. 

I state again, that you have graced me, by making me sit on an elevated seat, 
and gave me the good fortune of this opportunity to speak on the Shrimad 
Bhagwat. My heart is filled with gratitude, again and again, towards all of 
you. Shri Laxminivasji Birla and his wife have already fixed a Satsang for 
next year. So, if the Lord keeps us all healthy, we will again have the good 
fortune to listen to, and describe God-related topics, around the same time 
next year. By God's Grace, may Shri Laxminivasji Birla and his wife 
continue to have such Godly thoughts and inclinations, again and again, 
which result in opportunities for people to escape from worldly thoughts, 
and engage in thoughts about the Lord. 

Shri Krishna Bhagawan ki Jai! Victory to the Lord Shri Krishna! 



Om Shantih Shantih Shantih 



352 



Glossary 



Aagrah, meaning intense urge 
Aakriti, meaning shape 
Aasakta, meaning in love 
Aashik, meaning lover 
Aastikya, meaning faith 
Aatyantik, meaning the ultimate 
Abhay, meaning fearlessness 

Abhichar, pronounced abhichaar, meaning worship for destruction. 
Abhinivesh, pronounced abhinive'sh, meaning attachment, or fear of death 
Abhinnanimmittopaadaan kaaran, meaning the basic stuff which is used, as well as 
one who uses it, to create. 

Abhokta, pronounced abhoktaa, meaning the one who experiences non-enjoyership 
Achala, meaning unmoving 

Acharya, pronounced aachaarya, meaning Teacher 
Achintya means unthinkable, unimaginable. 

Achyut, a name of the Lord, meaning the one who never falls form his position 

Adbhut, meaning extraordinary 

Adharma, that which is contrary to Dharma 

Adhibhautik, pronounced aadhibhautik, meaning gross 

Adhibhoot means the gross 

Adhidaiva means the divine 

Adhidaivik, pronounced aadhidaivik, meaning spiritual 
Adhidevta, pronounced adhide Vtaa, meaning subtle demigod 
Adhikaran, meaning support. 

Adhikari, pronounced adhikaari, meaning eligible person 

Adhiroodha, meaning being overcome 

Adhishthan, pronounced adhishthaan, meaning sub-stratum 

Adhudaivik, pronounced aadhidaivik, meaning subde 

Adhyarop, pronounced adhyaarop, meaning superimposed. 

Adhyaropit pronounced adhyaaropit, means superimposed. 

Adhyas, pronounced adhyaas, meaning a super imposed. 

Adhyatma pronounced adhyaatma, means the philosophy of spirituality. 

Adhyatmik, pronounced aadhyaatmik, meaning spiritual 

Adideva, pronounced aadide V, meaning the primordial Devta 

Aditya, pronounced aaditya, meaning the Sun. 

Adityas, pronounced aadityas, meaning the sons of Did, who were Devtas - demi gods 
Advait, meaning Non-duality, 

Advaitswaroop, meaning the personification of non-duality 
Advitiya, pronounced adviteeya, meaning non-dual. 
Aghasur, pronounced aghaasur 
Agni means fire. 

Agnyan, pronounced agnaan, meaning ignorance; a (lack of) gnan (knowledge). 
Agyaat Sakhaa means the unknown friend and companion. 
Aham, meaning the individual T 
Aham-pada, meaning the T factor 



353 



Ahankaararoopa ahankar, pronounced ahankaararoopa ahankaar, means the individual 

awareness of being a separate entity 

Ahankar, pronounced ahankaar, meaning the subtle ego 

Ahimsa, pronounced ahimsaa, meaning non-violence 

Aishwarya, meaning glory and luxury 

Aja, pronounced ajaa, meaning Maya. 

Ajamil, pronounced ajaamil 

Akarma, meaning lack of action, or meaningless action 

Akashvani, pronounced aakaashvaani, meaning a celestial voice 

Akhand-satta, pronounced akhand-sattaa, meaning the indivisible existence 

Akrura, meaning not cruel 

Akshat, meaning whole grains of rice 

Akshauhini, one Akshauhini has 109350 infantry, 65,610 cavalry, 21870 chariots and 
21870 elephants 
Alak, meaning curls. 

Amalatma Purush, meaning the pure Atma, the Lord 
Amavashya, pronounced amaavashyaa, meaning no moon 
Amrit Kalash, meaning the vessel containing the elixir 
Amrit, meaning elixir 
Anaadi means without beginning. 

Anandaghan, pronounced aanandghan, meaning blissful. 
Anandaswaroop, meaning bliss incarnate 
Anant means without an end. 

Anatma, pronounced anaatmaa, meaning inanimate 
Anitya means transient. 

Annamaya sheath of the gross body, which is made of anna (food) 
Anshuman, pronounced anshumaan 

Antahakaran, meaning the 'inner organ', comprising manas (mind), buddhi (intellect), 

chitta (inclinations) and ahankara (subtle ego). 

Ante" matih saa gatih, meaning our last thoughts lead us. 

Anugraha, meaning Grace 

Anurag, pronounced anuraag, meaning attachment 

Anushasan Parva, pronounced anushaasan parv, meaning the portion of discipline. 
Anushthaan, meaning a ritual with a fixed purpose for a fixed duration, with certain 
regulations. 

Anushthup Chanda, meaning a poetic meter. 
Anvay, meaning concomitance 
Anvay-Vyatire'k means concomitance-variation 

Apaan vayu, pronounced apaan vaayu, meaning one of the five winds in our body 
Aparicchinna means not separate, unified. 
Aparigraha, meaning not hoarding anything 
Aparoksha meaning subtle. 

Apasaras, pronounced apsaraas, meaning celestial nymphs. 
Apoorva, meaning the unseen potency of an act of the remote past 
Arishtasura, pronounced arishtaasur 

Artha is the second human achievement, meaning material wealth 
Arti, pronounced aarti, meaning a ritual of worship, using a lamp. 
Asana, pronounced aasan, meaning a seat or mat, to sit on, and also a yogic posture 



354 



Asanchay, meaning not saving anything 
Asanga, meaning unattached. 

Asangata, pronounced asangataa, meaning aloofness 

Ashram, pronounced aashram, meaning a retreat, also one of the four stages of life 

Ashrama Dharma means the Dharma for the different stages of life. 

Ashta siddhis, the eight supernatural powers 

Ashtadhaa Prakriti means the eight faceted nature of creation 

Ashutosh, meaning easily pleased, another name of the Lord Shiva. 

Ashvamedha, pronounced ashvame'dh, meaning horse sacrifice. 

Asmita, pronounced asmitaa, meaning the sense of the ego 

Asteya, pronounced aste'ya, meaning having no desire for what is not rightfully ours 

Astikta, pronounced aastiktaa, meaning belief in God 

Asura agni, meaning a demonic fire 

Asura visarga means those with demonic tendencies. 

Asura yoni, meaning having the body of a demon. 

Asura, meaning demon. Sura means demi god, and a+sura means not godly. 
Atithi seva, pronounced atithi se Vaa, meaning service to guests 
Atma, pronounced aatmaa, meaning Soul 

Atma-Anatma, pronounced aatmaa-anaatmaa, meaning the eternal and the seemingly 
real, transitory 

Atmabal, pronounced aatmabal, meaning moral courage or inner strength 
Atmabodha, pronounced aatmabodha, meaning the knowledge of the Atman 
Atmachintan, pronounced aatmachintan, meaning reflection upon the Atma 
Atmadev, pronounced aatmade V, meaning the Lord who is our Atma 
Atmagnan, pronounced aatmagnaan, meaning knowledge of the Atma 
Atman means the soul. 

Atmanubhuti, pronounced aatmaanubhooti, meaning the experience of the Atma 
Atmaram, pronounced aatmaaraam, meaning blissfully content within His own Atma 
Atmatattva, pronounced aatmatattva, meaning the essence of the Atma 
Atur, pronounced aatur 

Atyantik, pronounced aatyantik, meaning absolute 
Avadhoot, meaning a wandering monk. 

Avaran bhang, pronounced aavaran bhung, meaning the removal of ignorance 

Avatar, pronounced avataar, meaning a descent of the Lord, as incarnations 

Avidya Granthi, pronounced avidyaa granthi, meaning an imaginary knot which ties the 

true Self to the body and mind, nescience 

Avidya, pronounced avidyaa, meaning ignorance or nescience 

Avikaari, meaning unchanging 

Avirbhoot means manifestation 

Ayurveda, pronounced ayurvelda, meaning the Veda which teaches us how to get good 
health and long life. 
Baal, meaning children. 

Badh samanadhikaran, pronounced baadh samaanaadhikaran, meaning negating both T 
and the 'other' 

Bakasura, pronounced bakaasur 

Balgopal, pronounced baalgopaal, meaning the child Krishna 
Balidaan, meaning the sacrifice, or charity performed by Bali. 
Bhaavaakaara, meaning emotionally united with the Lord with form 



355 



Bhaavadvaita, meaning non-duality of feeling 

Bhadra, meaning noble; also bhaadra, which is the name of a lunar month 

Bhadra, the name of one of Shri Krishna's wives, pronounced bhadraa 

Bhadramaas, pronounced bhaadramaas, meaning the month of Bhadra. 

Bhagavad bhavana, pronounced bhagavad bhaavnaa, meaning the feeling that everything 

is the Lord 

Bhagavadiya, pronounced bhagavadeeya, meaning of the Lord. 
Bhagwan, meaning the Lord 

Bhagwat Dharma, pronounced bhaagwat dharm, meaning the Dharma propounded by 
the Bhagwat 

Bhagwat, pronounced bhaagvat (meaning of the Lord). 

Bhagwatamrit. Pronounced bhaagwataamrit, meaning the amrit (elixir) of Bhagwan (the 
Lord) 

Bhagwats, pronounced bhaagvats, meaning great devotees. 

Bhajan, meaning devotional singing or remembering God lovingly. 

Bhakta, meaning devotee 

Bhakti marg, meaning the path of devotion 

Bhakti means devotion. 

Bhakti sampraday, pronounced Bhakti sampradaay, meaning the tradition of Bhakti 

Bhakti Shastra, pronounced Bhakti shaastra, meaning the scriptures pertaining to Bhakti 

Bhakti Yoga is to attach ourselves to the Lord through devotion (bhakti) 

Bhaktibhava, pronounced bhaktibhaav, meaning feeling of devotion 

Bhakti-gnan-karmayoga, meaning devotion-knowledge and worship through action 

Bhaktigrahya, pronounced bhaktigraahya, meaning understood by Bhakti 

Bharat, pronounced bhaarata, meaning ancient India. 

Bharatvarsha, pronounced bhaaratvarsh. 

Bhautik, meaning gross 

Bhava, pronounced bhaav, meaning feeling 

Bhaya, meaning fear. 

Bheda, pronounced bhe'd, meaning the division 

Bhishmapitamah pronounced bheeshmapitaamah. 

Bhog means self indulgence. 

Bhogabhoomi, meaning the land of indulgence. 

Bhootasarga means the different types of creatures. 

Bhram means false impression. 

Bhramar Geet, meaning the song of the bee 

Bhringee, meaning blackbee, a kind of insect 

Bhudevi, pronounced bhoode Vi, meaning the Goddess Earth 

Bhupati, meaning the husband of the Earth, meaning the Lord Vishnu 

Bhuvanabhushana, meaning the ornament of the world 

Bibhatsa, meaning horrible 

Brahamchari, pronounced brahmachaari, meaning celibate student 

Brahamvid means the one who knows the Brahman 

Brahma Kalpa means the eon of Brahma. 

Brahma, pronounced brahmaa, the Creator 

Brahmaakaar, meaning being one with the formless Brahman 

Brahmacharya means celibacy 



356 



Brahmacharyashrama, pronounced brahmacharyaashram, meaning the celibate stage of 
life 

Brahmadandastra, pronounced brahmadandaastra, meaning the weapon of an invisible 
curse, given by a Brahmin 

Brahmagnani, pronounced brahmagnaani, meaning one who knows the Brahman 
Brahmahatya, pronounced brahmahatyaa, meaning the crime of killing a Brahmin. 
Brahmahrid, meaning the Brahman in the lake of the heart. 
Brahmaloka means the land (loka) of the Brahma 

Brahmananda, pronounced brahmaanand, meaning the bliss of the Brahman. 
Brahmanas, meaning the priestly cast. 

Brahmanda, pronounced brahmaand, meaning the egg of Brahma, the egg of the cosmos 

Brahmarandhra, an invisible opening on the crown of the head 

Brahmastra, pronounced brahmaastra, meaning the invincible weapon of Brahma. 

Brahmatmaikya bodha means the knowledge that nothing exists except the one 

Brahman. 

Brahmavidya, pronounced brahmavidyaa, meaning the knowledge of the Brahman. 
Brahmin, meaning priest 

Brahm-mukti, meaning liberation, knowing oneself as the Brahman 
Buddha meaning enlightened. 
Buddhi, meaning intellect 

Chaandra Tattva, meaning the essence of the moon 

Chaitanya, meaning spirit, life, the sentience, intelligence, supreme spirit, All-being 
Chakra, meaning discus 

Chakravarti Samrat, pronounced chakravarti samraat, meaning an Emperor 
Chala, meaning movable 

Chandal, pronounced chaandaal, meaning a low caste person 
Chandra Vansha, meaning the lineage of Chandra, the moon 
Chandra Vanshi, meaning of the lineage of Chandra, the Moon 
Chandra, meaning Moon 

Chandrama, pronounced chandramaa, meaning the moon. 

Chandrayana Vrat, pronounced chandraayana vrat, meaning a ritualistic diet. 

Chanur, pronounced chaanoor 

Charanamrita, pronounced charanaamrit, meaning the elixir of the water touched by the 
Lord's feet. 

Chaturdashi, meaning the fourteenth date of the lunar calendar 

Chaturmas, pronounced chaturmaas, meaning four months in the rainy season 

Chaturyugi, meaning four Yugas 

Chatushloki Bhagwat, meaning the essence of the Bhagwat in four verses. 

Chatushloki Mahabharata, pronounce chatushloki mahabhaarat, means a summery of the 

Mahabharata in four verses. 

Cheer haran, meaning stealing of garments 

Chetan shakti, pronounced che'tan shakti, meaning the power of the spirit 
Chetan, pronounced che'tan, meaning awareness, or the spirit 
Chid means pure awareness 

Chinmatra satta, pronounced chinmaatra sattaa, meaning the bare awareness and 
existence 

Chinmay, meaning animate 
Chitrajalpa, meaning wild talk 



357 



Chitraketu, pronounced chitrake'tu. 
Chitralekha, pronounced chitrale'khaa 
Chitswaroop, meaning knowledge incarnate 
Chitta shuddhi, meaning lucid mental condition. 
Chitta, meaning attentiveness 
Daan, meaning donation or charity 

Dadhichi, pronounced dadheechee, a sage called Dahyarvana. 
Dadiyasaas, meaning grandmother-in-law. 
Daityabhaav, meaning demonic feelings 
Daityas, meaning demons. 

Daiva visarga means those with Godly tendencies. 
Daiva, meaning Godly. 
Daivi, meaning Godly 

Dakshina, pronounced dakshinaa, meaning monetary gift to a Brahmin 
Dakshinayana, pronounced dakshinaayan, meaning the dark period. 
Dama, pronounced daam, meaning bribes. 
Danda, meaning punishment. 

Daridra Narayana, the Lord in the form of the beggar 
Darshan Shastra, meaning the theology of religious philosophy 
Daruk, pronounced daaruk 

Dau dada, meaning elder brother, a name of Balaramji 

Deha Buddhi, pronounced de'ha, means thinking (buddhi) that we are the body (deha) 
Dehadhyas, pronounced de'haadhyas, meaning a false identification with the body 
Dehatma-bhram pronounced de'haatmabhram, means a mistaken identification of the 
Atman being the de'ha (body). 

Deshantar, pronounced de'shantar, meaning a change of land. 

Dev Lok, pronounced deV lok, meaning the Land of the Devtas 

Devagni, pronounced de Vaagni, meaning a divine fire 

Devansh, pronounced de Vansh, meaning with a percentage of the Devta. 

Devarshi, pronounced de Varshi, meaning the Rishi of the Devtas, Narada. 

Devasura sangram, pronounced deVaasur sangraam, meaning the war between the 

demigods and the demons 

Devi, pronounced deVi, meaning Goddess, a respectful form of addressing a lady. 

Deviji, pronounced deViji, meaning goddess, a respectful form of addressing a lady. 

Devlok, pronounced de Vlok, meaning the land of the Devtas 

Devnyas, pronounced deVnyas, meaning a nyas of a Devta. 

Devraj, pronounced deVraj, meaning Indra, the King of the Devtas. 

Devta, pronounced de Vtaa, meaning demigod 

Dhanush Yagya, a spiritual endeavor 

Dharana Shakti, pronounced dhaaranaa Shakti, meaning the power of upholding. 
Dharana Yoga, pronounced dhaarnaa yog, means dwelling mentally upon the Lord in 
meditation 

Dharini pronounced dhaarini, meaning the supporting power 
Dharma bhoomi, meaning the land of Dharma. 

Dharma is the first of four human achievements, meaning righteousness 
Dharma sankat, meaning a dilemma of what is right 
Dharma Shakti, meaning the strength of righteousness 

Dharma shastras, pronounced shastras, meaning scriptures pertaining to religion 



358 



Dharmaatmas, pronounced dharmaatmaas, meaning those who are religious and ethical. 
Dharmabhas, pronounced dharmaabhaas, meaning an illusion of Dharma 
Dharmaraj, pronounced Dharmaraaj, another name for the Lord of death. 
Dharmashray, pronounced dharmaashray, meaning the protection of Dharma 
Dharmic, pronounced dhaarmik, meaning pertaining to Dharma. 
Dharna, pronounced dhaarnaa, meaning fixing one's attention 
Dhenu, pronounced dhe nu 

Dhenukasura, pronounced dhe nukaasur, meaning the demon Dhenu 
Dhobi, meaning washer man 

Dhritarashtra means one who holds on the Nation, symbolizing a greed for power and 
position. 

Dhriti pradhan, pronounced dhriti pradhaan, dhriti means the power to hold on, and 

pradhan means predominantly. 

Dhruvaloka meaning the land of Dhruva. 

Dhyana, pronounced dhyaan, meaning meditation. 

Digvijay, meaning the conquest of neighboring kingdoms 

Drashtaa meaning the observer or witness 

Dravyadvait, meaning non-duality of matter 

Drishti, meaning vision 

Drishti-srishti, meaning a vision of the world. 
Drishya, meaning the scene 
Dukha, meaning sorrow 

Dukha-nasha, pronounced dukha-naash, meaning the destroying of sorrows 
Dupatta, pronounced dupattaa, meaning a cloth worn over the shoulders 
Duragraha, pronounced duraagraha, meaning a negative urge 
Dussang, meaning bad company 
Dvaadashakshara means of twelve words. 

Dvadashatma, pronounced dvaadash, meaning twelve +Atma, pronounced aatma, 
meaning soul 

Dvaitadvait meaning partial Non-duality, 

Dvapar Yuga, pronounced dvaapar, meaning the period of time called Dvapar 
Dvesh, pronounced dve'sh, meaning aversion 
Dwarka, pronounced dwaarkaa 

Falantar, pronounced falaantar, meaning a change of result. 

Gada, pronounced gadaa, meaning mace. 

Gandha, meaning fragrance 

Gandharva, meaning a celestial being. 

Ganga, pronounced gangaa 

Gangaji, ji is an affix denoting respect 

Garal, meaning poison. 

Garbhadhan, pronounced garbhaadhaan, meaning implanting the seed. 
Garuda, meaning eagle, the bird which the Lord rides. 
Garudaji, ji is a respectful affix 

Gaurishankar means the Lord Shankar, with his consort, Gauri. The two are as one. 

Gayatri is a powerful mantra, giving the essence of the Vedas. 

Ghada, pronounced ghadaa, meaning a pot, symbolizing the human body 

Ghadis, pronounced ghadees, meaning a measure of time. One ghadi is twenty four 

minutes. 



359 



Ghee, meaning ratified butter 
Girinar, pronounced girinaar 
Giriraj, pronounced giriraaj 

Gnan marg, pronounced gnan marg, meaning the path of knowledge 
Gnan Pradhan, pronounced gnaan, meaning dominated by knowledge. 
Gnan, pronounced gnaan, meaning Knowledge 

Gnanadrishti, pronounced gnaandrishti, meaning the vision with Knowledge 
Gnanayoga, pronounced gnaanyog, meaning uniting with the Lord through knowledge 
Gnanendriyas, pronounced gnaane'ndreeyas, meaning sense organs 
Gnangni, pronounced gnaanaagni, meaning the purifying fire of Knowledge 
Gnani, pronounced gnaani, meaning an enlightened person 
Go-Charan, pronounced gochaaran, meaning grazing cattle 

Goloka means the land (loka) where Shri Krishna lives with His beloved cows (go) 

Gomata, pronounced gomaataa, meaning the mother cow 

Gopa-Gopis, meaning cowherd and cowherd women 

Gopa-kumaris, meaning the daughters of the Gopas 

Gopal, meaning child Krishna 

Gopi Geet, meaning the song of the Gopis 

Gopis, meaning milkmaids 

Gorochan, a yellow pigment, having medicinal properties 

Govardhan, another name of the Giriraj mountain, situated near Vraja 

Govind, a name of Shri Krishna 

Graha, meaning crocodile, or an astrological planet 

Grihastha Dharma means the Dharma for the householders. 

Grihastha, meaning householder 

Grihasthashram, meaning the householder stage 

Gunas, meaning latent tendencies. 

Gunateeta Bhakti, means devotion (bhakti) which is beyond the three Gunas 
Guru Dakshina, pronounced guru dakshinaa, meaning a gift to the Guru 
Guru seva, pronounced guru se Vaa, meaning service to the Guru 
Gurukul, meaning the Guru's Ashram 
Gwaal baal, meaning the cowherd boys. 
Gwaals, meaning cowherds 
Haath, meaning hand. 
Hansa, meaning swan 

Hansavatara, pronounced hansaavtaar, meaning the Lord's descent as a swan 
Hathras, pronounced haathras. 

Havan, the fire where oblations are poured in a Yagya. 
Havishya, meaning offerings made in the ritual fire worship. 
Hayagreeva, a demon with a horse's neck 

Hiranyagarbha Chaitanya, meaning the spirit in the golden egg of the universe 
Hiranyagarbha means the primordial egg, in which the whole universe exists 
Hriday Prasad, pronounced hriday prasaad, means the gift of the heart, which 
happiness. 

Ichcha Prasuti, pronounced ichchaa prasooti, meaning the ability to deliver the baby 
will. 

Idam, meaning 'this' 

Indra, the Lord of the Devtas, who controls the rains. 



360 



Indraloka, meaning the land of Indra, that is heaven 
Indriya-jaya means control over the sense organs 
Indriyas, meaning the organs 

Ishanukatha Skandha, meaning the Skandha which contains the stories of the Lord 
Ishwara Chaitanya, meaning the spirit in the form of the Lord with attributes 
Ishwara, pronounced eeshvar, meaning the Almighty God, the supreme Soul. 
Itihases, pronounced itihaases, meaning histories 
Jaati, meaning species 

Jada Bharata, Jada meaning foolish, and Jada Bharata means the Bharata who behaved 

like a folish person. 

Jada, meaning foolish 

Jagat, meaning the world 

Jambavan, pronounced jaambavaan 

Jambavati, pronounced jaambavati 

Japa, meaning a ritual chanting with the rosary. 

Jara, pronounced jaraa, meaning old age 

Jarasandh, pronounced jaraasandh 

Jatakarma, pronounced jaatkarma, a ritual which is carried out when a baby is born. 
Jay ghosh, meaning victory cry 
Jeeva, meaning an individual soul 

Jeeva-chaitanya, meaning the spirit within the mortal body, or individual spirit 

Jeevanmukta, meaning a liberated soul 

Jeevanmukti, meaning being liberated in this life 

Jeevatma, pronounced jeevaatmaa, meaning an individual soul 

Jhaari, meaning a vessel with a spout 

Jigyasu, pronounced jigyaasu, means a seeker of the ultimate Truth. 

Jitendriya, pronounced jite'ndriya, meaning one who has control over his sense organs 

Jootha, pronounced joothaa, meaning rendered impure by the touch of the lips 

Kaal, means time, or death. 

Kaamana means desire 

Kaamanuja means the younger brother of Kaam, i.e. anger 
Kaarshini Bhagwat, the Bhagwat about Krishna 

Kachap Avatar, pronounced kacchap avataar, meaning the Lord's descent as a turtle 

Kachap, meaning tortoise. 

Kahaars, meaning palanquin bearers. 

Kailash, meaning the abode of the Lord Shiva 

Kaimatik, meaning estimate. 

Kaimutik, meaning indicative 

Kaitabh symbolizes aversion. 

Kaivalya, meaning the state of pure existence 

Kajal, pronounced kaajal, meaning myrrh. 

Kala, pronounced kaal, meaning Time, or death 

Kalachakra, pronounced kaalchakra, meaning the wheel of Time 

Kalas, pronounced kalaas, meaning portions 

Kalashray, pronounced kaalaashray, meaning the protection of Time 
Kali Kaal means the age of Kali. 
Kalindi, pronounced kaalindee 

Kalindiji, pronounced kaalindiji, another name for Yamunaji. 



361 



Kaliyuga, meaning the age of Kali 
Kalpa, meaning a period of time 
Kalpataru, meaning Wish-fulfilling tree. 
Kalpavriksha, meaning the wish fulfilling tree 
Kalyavan, pronounced kaalyavan 

Kama Shastra, pronounced kaam shaastra, meaning the science of love making 

Kama, pronounced kaam, meaning desire, or the Devta of desire 

Kamadhenu, pronounced kaamadhe'nu, meaning the wish- fulfilling cow 

Kamadhuk, pronounced kaamdhuk, meaning wish fulfilling 

Kamandalu, meaning a vessel for carrying water. 

Kanhaiya, an affectionate name for Shri Krishna 

Karan means the instrument 

Karan, pronounced kaaran, meaning cause 

Karma gnan meaning knowledge of the right action. 

Karma Kshetra, pronounce kshe'tra, meaning the land of work. 

Karma Pradhan, pronounced pradhaan, meaning dominated by action. 

Karma Yogi meaning one who yokes himself to the Lord through his actions. 

Karma, meaning actions 

Karmabandhan, meaning being attached to work 
Karmafal, meaning the fruit of the action 

Karma-kand, pronounced karma-kaand, meaning ritualistic worship of the scriptures 
Karmayoga, meaning the work which yokes us to the Lord 
Karmendriyas, pronounced karma "ndreeyas, meaning the organs of action. 
Karta, pronounced kartaa, meaning the one who acts, the doer 

Karta-bhokta, pronounced katraa-bhoktaa, meaning the one who acts and experiences - 
the doer and the enjoyer 
Karun, meaning pathetic 

Karunavarunalaya, pronounced karunaavarunaalay, meaning the sea of compassion 
Karya, pronounced kaarya, meaning the act, or the effect 
Kashi, pronounced kaashi 

Kathaa, meaning discourse, or talks about the Lord 
Katyayan, pronounced katyaayan. 
Katyayini, pronounced katyaayini 

Kaustubh, meaning the jewel that clings to the chest of the Lord 

Kayadhu, pronounced kayaadhu. 

Keshi, pronounced ke'shi 

Keshini, pronounced ke'shini 

Ketu, pronounced ke'tu 

Khadau, meaning wooden slippers 

Khala, meaning wicked person 

Kheer, a sweet dish of rice and milk 

Khel, pronounced khe'l, meaning play 

Kirat, pronounced kiraat, etc are named of backward tribes. 

Kirtan, pronounced keertan, means singing the Lord's glories, or chanting His name 
musically. 

Kosas, each kosa is two miles. 

Koshas are the imaginary sheaths of nescience 

Krama Mukti means liberation in stages. 



362 



Kripamurti, pronounced kripaamurti, meaning the embodiment of Grace 
Krishi Laxmi, the wealth of agriculture 
Krishna charitra, the biography of Krishna 
Krishnapaksha, meaning the dark fortnight. 
Krishnavartmaa, meaning a lowly person 

Kriya Yoga, pronounced kriyaa yog, meaning the action(kriya) which unites(yoga) us to 
the Lord 

Kriyadvaita, pronounced kriyaadvait, meaning the non-duality of action 

Kriyayoga, pronounced kriyaayog, meaning offering one's actions to the Lord as worship 

Krodha, meaning anger. 

Krura meaning cruel 

Kshama, pronounced kshamaa, meaning forgiveness 
Kshatriya, meaning the warrior caste. 

Ksheersagar, pronounced ksheersaagar, meaning the milky ocean 

Kundalini Shakti, also called the serpent power, which resides at the base of the spine 

and can be tapped by Yogic exercises 

Kuru Vansha, meaning the lineage of the Kurus 

Kurukshetra, pronounced kurukshe'tra 

Kusha, pronounced kushaa, a type of grass used for religious rituals 
Laa-javab, laa-saani, meaning incomparable, the best. 
Lajja, pronounced lajjaa, meaning sense of shame 
Lala, pronounced laalaa, meaning son 

Laxmi, the consort of the Lord Narayana, and the goddess of Grace and prosperity 
Laxmiji is the consort of the Lord Vishnu. 

Laxmipati, meaning the husband of Laxmi, the goddess of grace and prosperity 
Laxmirahit, meaning bereft of wealth and beauty 
Leela means play, frolic, or caprice of the Lord. 
Lobha meaning greed. 
Loka, meaning this world 

Loka-parloka, meaning this world and the heavenly world to which the soul goes after 

death, as a reward for meritorious deeds 

Maadan, meaning intoxication 

Madhu symbolizes attachment 

Madhur rasa, meaning romantic love 

Madhur, meaning romantic and sweet 

Maha Raas, pronounced mahaa raas, meaning the great raas 

Mahabhav, pronounced mahaa bhaav, meaning overwhelming emotion 

Mahakalpa, meaning the great period of time 

Mahamuni, pronounced mahaamunees, meaning the great sage 

Mahapralay, pronounced mahaapralay, meaning total dissolution 

Mahapuran, pronounced mahaapuraan, meaning the great history. 

Mahapurush, pronounced mahaapurush, meaning a great man, or great men 

Maharaj, pronounced mahaaraj, meaning a king amongst men. 

Mahat means the Universal spirit. 

Mahatmas, pronounced mahaatmaas, meaning great souls. 

Mahatmya, pronounced maahaatmya, meaning the chapters clarifying the importance 
Mahattattva, meaning the Soul 

Mahavishnu, pronounced mahaavishnu, meaning the Great Vishnu 



363 



Mahayoga, pronounced mahaayog, meaning great unification 
Mala, pronounced maalaa, 
Malati, meaning jasmine. 

Mamata, pronounced mamataa, means fondness or attachment. 
Mamatva, meaning possessive partiality 
Mana, pronounced maan, meaning pride 
Mana, pronounced mun, meaning mind 

Manan means giving deep thought to what we have heard about the Lord. 
Manasik diksha, pronounced maanasik deekshaa, meaning telepathic initiation 
Manav Dharma means dharma for humans. 

Mangala Charan, pronounced mangalaa charan, means propitious invocation. 

Mani, meaning a precious gem 

Manomaya is the mind, the subtle body 

Manomaya Kosha, meaning the sheath of the mind 

Mano-vijay means conquering the mind's impulses 

Manthan, meaning churning 

Mantra nyas, meaning a nyas done through a mantra. 
Mantra, meaning a mystical chant 

Manusmriti, meaning the code of conduct established by Swayambhuva Manu 
Manvantar, meaning a period of Time 
Marich, pronounced maareech 
Marichi, pronounced maarichi. 

Marutganas are the sons of Diti who became Devtas. 
Maryada, pronounced maryaadaa, meaning the limits of decency. 
Mathani, pronounced mathaani, meaning the churning rod 
Matsya Bhagwan, meaning the Lord in the form of the fish 
Maun, meaning remaining silent 

Maya, pronounced maayaa, meaning the Lord's power of illusion 
Mayadanav, pronounced muydaanav, meaning the demon Maya 
Mil, pronounced meel, meaning mixed. 
Mithila, pronounced mithilaa 

Mithilapuri, pronounced mithilaapuri, meaning the city f Mithila 
Mithyaa, meaning unreal. 

Mo sama kaun kutil khala kaami, meaning, who in this world is as crooked, wicked, and 
full of desires, as me? 
Modan, meaning pleasure 

Moha, meaning attachment or delusion, or illusion 
Mohini, meaning a supremely captivating woman 

Moksha means liberation from worldly desires, as well as the cycle of rebirth 

Mooladhar Chakra, pronounced moolaadhaar chakra, meaning the center of energy 

situated at the base of the spine 

Mor mukut, meaning a crown with peacock feathers 

Mor Mukuti, meaning, wearing a crown with peacock feathers 

Mritasanjeevani Vidya is a magic spell to bring a dead person to life. 

Mritika Buddhi, pronounced mritikaa buddhi, meaning when we believe that we are the 

earth/matter/ substance., and not a vessel 

Mugdha, meaning fascinated. 



364 



Mukhya samanadhikaran, pronounced mukhya samaanaadhikaran, meaning equating the 
self with to the Brahman 
Mukta meaning liberated. 
Mukti means liberation 

Mumukshaa, meaning a desire to be liberated 
Munis mean Sages. 

Murlimanohar, meaning the one who looks enchanting with His flute 

Naamkaran sanskar, pronounced naamkaran sanskaar, meaning the naming ceremony. 

Naam-roop-rahit, meaning nameless and formless. 

Naasti, meaning is not. 

Nabhi, pronounced naabhi, meaning the naval 

Nag, pronounced naag, meaning serpent 

Nagins, pronounced naagins, meaning the wives of the nag 

Naimisharanya - a forest called Naimish (aranya means forest) 

Naimittik, meaning caused by some factor 

Naisargic, meaning natural 

Nakshatra, meaning constellation. 

Nama-sankirtan, pronounced naam-sankirtan, meaning singing of the Lord's name 

Nanda Bhavan, meaning the house of Nanda. 

Nanda nandan, meaning the son of Nanda 

Nandalal, pronounced nandlaal, meaning the son of Nanda 

Narad, pronounced naarad 

Naraka, meaning hell. 

Nara-Narayana, pronounced nar-naaraayan, meaning the Lord in the form of a jeeva and 
Ishwara 

Narasimha is the half man, half lion form of the Lord 

Narayana Kavacha, pronounced naaraayan kavach, this is an invisible arm our, created by 

the Lord Narayana when this procedure is undertaken faultlessly. 

Narayana Sarovar, pronounced naaraayan sarovar, meaning a lake called Narayana. 

Narayana, pronounced naraayana, means the Almighty God who abides in all. 

Natavara, meaning the King of the drama 

Natavaravapu, having the form of a handsome dramatist 

Nava Yogishwaras, the nine sons of Brahma, who became supreme Yogis 

Neti, pronounced ne'ti, meaning 'not this', and also the rope used for turning the 

churning rod 

Nididhyasan, pronounced nididhyaasan, means thinking repeatedly about the Lord and 
all we have heard about Him. 

Nirakar, pronounced niraakaar, meaning without form 

Nirdhan, meaning without wealth 

Nirdharmak, meaning without being bound by rules. 

Nirguna Bhakti, meaning devotion to the Lord without attributes 

Nirguna means without attributes. 

Nirguna nishta, pronounced nirgun nishthaa, meaning abiding in the formless Brahman. 
Nirguna tattva meaning the essence of the Lord without attributes. 
Nirodh, meaning restriction, halting the mind's external tendency. 
Nirukta is an exposition of the Vedas 
Niruttar, meaning conclusive 

Nirvikar, pronounced nirvikaar, meaning unchanging 



365 



Nisha, pronounced nishaa, meaning night. 
Nishad, pronounced nishaad, meaning a tribal 

Nishanath, pronounced nishaanaath, meaning the Lord of Nisha (night) 

Nishkaam Bhakti means devotion (bhakti) without desire(kaam) 

Nishkaam Karma meaning action without any selfish motive. 

Nishkam, pronounced nishkaam, meaning unmotivated by selfish interest. 

Niti, pronounced neetee, meaning ethics. 

Nitya meaning eternal, or daily routine 

Nitya-mukta, meaning ever free 

Nityaroopa Buddhi means the ever-present ability to think correctly. 
Niyama meaning routine observances or regulations. 

Nohana, pronounced nohanaa, meaning the rope used for tying the cow's hind legs 
during milking 
Nritya, meaning dance 

Nyas, pronounced nyaas, meaning super imposition. 

Odhnis, pronounced odhnees, meaning the cloth used by ladies as an upper garment 

Omkara, pronounced omkaar, meaning the sound of the Oum 

Ooti Skandha, means the Skandha which shows the (three types of) natures. 

Paalini Shakti means the power to preserve. 

Paapa, meaning sin 

Paapas, meaning sins. 

Paapatmas, pronounced paapaatmaas, meaning sinners. 
Paapi, meaning sinner. 

Padma Kalpa, pronounced paadm kalp, meaning the eon of Padma. 
Padma, meaning a lotus flower. 

Padma, pronounced padmaa, meaning the goddess Laxmi 

Padmagandha, pronounced padmagandhaa, meaning, having the fragrance of a lotus. 
Padmarag, pronounced padmaraag 

Pahar, a period of three hours. The third pahar would be mid morning 

Panchabhoot means the five elements, space, water, wind, earth and fire, of which 

everything is composed 

Parabhakti, pronounced paraabhakti, meaning supreme devotion 

Parabrahma Paramatma, pronounced Parabrahm paramaatmaa, meaning the absolute 

Brahman, which is the Supreme Reality 

Paraloka, meaning heaven 

Param means supreme 

Param Padam, means the supreme position. 

Paramananda, pronounced paramaanand, meaning the param (supreme) ananda (bliss). 
Paramartha, pronounced paramaarth, meaning the highest goal, or that which is 
supremely real. 

Paramatma, pronounced paramaatmaa, meaning the supreme Soul 
Paramatma-tattva, meaning the essence of the Paramatma 
Parameshwara, pronounced parame'shwar, meaning the supreme Ishwara. 
Paricchinna means being separate. 

Parikrama, pronounced parikramaa, meaning circumbulation 

Pariplava, pronounced paariplava 

Paripoorna, meaning absolute and total. 

Parloka, meaning the heaven a good man goes to after death 



366 



Paroksha, meaning indirect 

Paropakara, pronounced paropkaar, meaning obliging others 
Pashupati, the Lord of the animals 

Patal loka, pronounced paataal lok, means the nether world. 

Patipriya Bhava, meaning, 'May you always be the beloved of your husband' 

Patit Karma meaning lowly action. 

Pitambar, pronounced peetambar, is the golden colored garment worn around the Lord's 
shoulders 

Pitambardhari, pronounced peetambardhaari, meaning the one who wears a golden 

yellow upper garment 

Poorna, meaning complete or absolute. 

Praagya means the individual self in the state of deep sleep 

Praanas, meaning the activating powers. 

Prabhas Kshetra, pronounced prabhaas kshe'tra, meaning the region of Prabhas 

Prachetas, pronounced prache'taas, a group of ten brothers. 

Prachinvarhi, pronounced praachinvarhi. 

Pragya, pronounced praagya, meaning intellect 

Prahladji, pronounced prahlaad + ji. Ji is an affix showing respect. 

Praja, pronounced prajaa, meaning people. 

Prajapati, pronounced prajaapati, meaning Brahma, the Creator, also the King of the 
celestial people 

Prakrit, pronounced praakrit, meaning natural 

Prakriti, meaning Nature or the Lord's power of Creation. Prakriti is composed of the 
three gunas, viz. sattva, rajas, and tamas 

Prakriti-Purusha is the duality accepted by the Lord for creating the universe 
Prakritiyon, meaning the temperaments. 

Pralambasura, pronounced pralambaasur, meaning the demon called Pralamb 
Pralay means destruction or dissolution of the world 
Pralay nyas, meaning a nyas through destruction. 

Pralaykari, pronounced pralaykaaree, meaning, having the powers of destruction 
Prana, meaning spirit 

Pranama, pronounced pranaam, meaning bowing down 
Pranav, the sound of the Oum 
Pranay, meaning reverence 

Pranayama, pronounced praanaayam, meaning breath control 
Pranmaya, pronounced praanmay, means the sheath of vital airs 
Prapancha, meaning illusion of the world 
Prapti, pronounced praapti 

Prarabdha-nasha, pronounced prarabdha naash, meaning the destruction of the fruits of 
actions 

Prasad, pronounced prasaad, meaning a blessing, symbolized by food 
Pratipada, pronounced pratipadaa, meaning the first lunar date 

Pratyahar, pronounced pratyaahaar, meaning withdrawal of senses from their objects 

Pratyak chaitanya, meaning experience of existence 

Prayashchit, pronounced prayaashchit, meaning penance or atonement 

Prayatna shaithilya, meaning half-hearted effort 

Prem, pronounced pre'm, meaning pure love 

Prem-Bhakti, pronounced pre'm-bhakti, meaning loving devotion 



367 



Prikrama, pronounced parikramaa, meaning respectful circumbulation 

Prithvi, meaning Mother Earth 

Puja, pronounced pooja, meaning ritual worship 

Puja, pronounced poojaa, meaning ritualistic worship 

Punsavan, meaning the fetus is five months. Also milky. 

Punya, meaning spiritual merit. 

Puranacharya, pronounced puranaachaarya, meaning a Teacher of a Purana 
Puranas, pronounced puraanas, meaning mythological scriptures 

Puranjanopakhyan, pronounced puranjanopaakhyaan, meaning the story of Puranjana. 
Purnima, pronounced poornimaa, meaning the full moon 
Purohit, meaning a learned Brahmin, well versed in rituals. 
Puroorva, pronounced puroorvaa 
Purusha, meaning Soul 

Purusha-Prakriti, meaning the Lord and His power of Creation 

Purusharthta, pronounced purusharthas, meaning manly achievements or endeavor 

Purushottama means best amongst men, a name of the Lord. 

Pushti, meaning nourishing. 

Putana, pronounced pootnaa, a demoness. 

Putra, meaning son. 

Putravati Bhava, meaning 'May you have children' 

Putreshti Yagya, pronounced putre'shti, meaning a Yagya for getting a son. 
Quintal a measure of weight. Five quintals are about 10 cwts 

Raagatmika Bhakti, pronounced raagaatmikaa bhakti, meaning a lover-like devotion. 
Raas Leela, meaning the Lord's dance frolic 

Raas Vilas, pronounced raas vilaas, meaning the pleasures of the raas dance 
Radharani, pronounced raadhaaraanee 
Raga, meaning attachment 

Raga-dvesh, pronounced raag-dve'sh, meaning attachment- aversion 

Rahasya, meaning secret 

Rahu, pronounced raahu 

Raj Dharma means the Dharma for the rulers 

Raja, pronounced raajaa, meaning a King. 

Raja, pronounced raj, means the red dust and also the rajo guna which is a mixed 
tendency of human nature. 
Raj an, address for a King 

Rajarshi, meaning a rishi (sage) who rules with godly values, and without attachment, and 
also a King who has the qualities of a Rishi 

Rajashray, pronounced raajaashray, meaning the protection of the King 
Rajasic, pronounced raajasik, meaning of the rajoguna, with mixed tendencies 
Rajoguna, one of the three human tendencies, Rajoguna is an admixture of good and bad 
tendencies, and predominantly restless. 
Rajoguni, meaning the one with mixed tendencies 
Rakshasa meaning demon. 

Rama Rajya, pronounced raam raajya, meaning the Rule of Rama 
Ramanuja mean the younger brother of Rama. 

Ramavatar, pronounced raamavtaar, meaning the Lord's Avatar as Rama 
Ramcharit, pronounce raamcharit, meaning the biography of Rama 
Ranjan meaning pleasure. 



368 



Rasa means sweetness incarnate 

Rasa Vidya, pronounced rus vidyaa, meaning the skill for giving and obtaining pleasure 

Rasamaya means filled with sweetness 

Rasas, meaning the different kinds of emotions, or tastes 

Rasiyas, pronounced rasiyaas, meaning folk songs depicting romance, etc 

Rathangapani, pronounced rathaangapaani, meaning having a wheel of a chariot in the 

hand. A name of the Lord 

Revti, pronounced re Vti 

Rishi means a sage. 

Rishi-Munis, meaning sages and ascetics 

Roop, meaning form 

Roti, meaning a round, flat bread 

Rudra is another name for the Lord Shiva 

Saakar meaning with form. 

Saakshi, meaning witness 

Saayujya, meaning intimate union 

Sacchidananda, sad=truth, Chid=awareness, anand=bliss, makes sacchidananda, the 
Brahman 

Sacchidanandaghan, pronounced sacchidaanandghan, means the essence of the Lord. 

Sad = existence, Chid=eternal awareness, Anand=absolute bliss. Ghan means full of 

Sad means eternal reality 

Saddharma, meaning good Dharma 

Sadgati, meaning higher worlds attained after death 

Sadguru meaning a true Guru. 

Sadhak, pronounced saadhak, meaning one who strives to attain the Lord 

Sadhan Chatushtay, pronounced saadhan chatushtay, meaning the four requisites for 

spiritual practice, which include 1) vive'k, 2) vairaagya, 3) the sextet called shat sampattis, 

such as a) shama, b) dama, c) uparati, d) titikshaa, e) shraddhaa, f) samaadhaan, and 4) 

Mumukshaa 

Sadhana, pronounced saadhanaa, meaning effort for spiritual progress. 

Sadharma Skandha, meaning the Skandha of the religion of the Truth 

Sadhus, pronounced saadhoos, meaning men of God 

Sadhuta, pronounced saadhutaa, meaning saindiness. 

Sadyomukti means instantaneous liberation. 

Saguna Bhakti, meaning devotion to the Lord with attributes 

Saguna nishta, pronounced sagun nishthaa, meaning faith in the Brahman with form. 

Saguna tattva, meaning the essence of the Lord with attributes. 

Saguna, meaning with attributes 

Sahadev, pronounced sahade V 

Sahkya rasa, meaning the sweetness of friendship 

Sakaam, means with a desire. 

Sakar, pronounced saakaar, meaning with form 

Sakedoka, pronounced sake'tlok, means the land where Shri Rama lives 

Sakhya, meaning friendship 

Sakshi, pronounced saakshi, meaning witness 

Sama, pronounced saam, meaning reasoning. 

Samaadhi means deep meditation 

Samadarshi, meaning one who sees the same essence in all 



369 



Samadhan, pronounced samaadhaan, meaning reaching the right understanding. 
Samadhi, pronounced samaadhee, meaning deep meditation 
Samatva, meaning equanimity towards all. 
Samatvaguna means the quality of equanimity. 
Samba, pronounced saamb 

Sampraday, pronounced sampradaay, meaning religious sect. 
Samudra manthan, meaning the churning of the ocean 
Sanakadi, pronounced sanakaadee, meaning Sanak and others 

Sanatkumaradis, pronounced sanatkumaaraadis, meaning Sanatkumar and other sages 
Sandhi, meaning connecting point 

Sandhya vandan, pronounced sandhyaa vandan, meaning the ritual of purification 

Sangraha, meaning accumulation 

Sanjalpa, meaning constructive talk 

Sankalpa, meaning resolve, or oath. 

Sankalpamana means the mind which contains desires. 

Sankarshana is another name for Shesha. 

Sankhya Yoga, meaning the Sankya philosophy 

Sankhya, pronounced saankhya, meaning a school of philosophy 

Sankya-yoga, Sankhya is one of the six schools of philosophy 

Sanmaya means reality incarnate 

Sanmayi meaning eternal reality 

Sansara, pronounced sansaar, meaning the world we interact in. 

Sanskaras, pronounced sanskaaraas, meaning deep-seated impressions, and also rituals 
which impart culture 

Sanskritiyon, meaning the traditional beliefs. 
Sant, meaning Saint 

Santosh, meaning being satisfied with whatever one gets 

Sanyas, pronounced sanyaas, meaning total renunciation 

Sanyashrama, pronounced sanyaasashram, meaning renunciation 

Sanyasi, pronounced sanyaasi, meaning monk 

Sanyog, meaning being united with the beloved 

Saptarshis, meaning the seven sages 

Sarpa-yagya, meaning the fire worship to kill all snakes 

Sarva samartha, means capable of doing everything 

Sarvaatma, pronounced sarvaatmaa, meaning the Atma of all. 

Sat, meaning the real. 

Sat-Chid, meaning truth and awareness. 

Sati is the consort of Shiva before she is born as Parvati, a devoted wife 

Satis, Sati was the custom when the wives immolated themselves with the body of their 

husbands 

Satpurush, meaning a man, or men of Truth 
Satrajit, pronounced satraajit 

Satsang, meaning the company of Godly people, or discourses 
Satswaroop, meaning Truth incarnate 
Satta, pronounced sattaa, meaning power 
Sattvaguna means the highest tendency. 

Sattvaguna-rajoguna-tamoguna, meaning the lofty, mixed and base tendencies 
Sattvik, pronounced saatvik, meaning having pure tendencies 



370 



Satva, is the highest tendency 

Satvik, pronounced saatvik, means close to the Truth 

Satvikta, pronounced saatviktaa, meaning purity 

Satya Buddhi means the intellect which is inclined towards the Truth. 

Satya means the truth. 

Saubhagyavati Bahva, meaning, 'May you have the good fortune of your husband 
outliving you' 

Saur Tattva, meaning the essence of the Sun 
Saur, meaning Sun 

Saut, meaning another wife of the husband. 

Savitri is another name for the Gayatri mantra, and also the consort of Brahma. 
Seemantopanayan, when the fetus is seven months. 
Shabarasura, pronounced shambaraasur 
Shabda, meaning sound 

Shadvikar, pronounced shadvikaar, meaning the six wrong tendencies in human nature. 
These are desire, anger, greed, attachment, arrogance, and envy 
Shaivas means those who worship the Lord in the form of Shiva. 
Shaiya, pronounced shaiyaa, means bed 
Shakatasura, pronounced shakataasur. 

Shaktas, pronounced shaaktas, meaning those who worship the female form of the Lord, 
as Shakti. 

Shakti, meaning power and strength. 

Shaligram Shila, pronounced shaaligraam shila, meaning a round stone worshipped as 
Vishnu 

Shalva, pronounced shaalv 

Shama-dama, shama means peacefulness, tranquility, composure, and dama means 
control of the senses 

Shandamark, pronounced shandaamark, the two names, Shand + Amark, joined 
together. 

Shankarji another name for the Lord Shiva 

Shankha, meaning conch shell. 

Shanta, pronounced shaant, meaning peace 

Shantachitta, pronounced shaantchitts, meaning one who is tranquil 
Shantananda, pronounced shantaanand, meaning the enjoyment of peace. 
Shantarasa, pronounced shaantrus, meaning the bliss of peace 

Shanti Parva, pronounced shaanti parv, meaning the section on peace, in the 
Mahabharata 

Shanti, pronounced shaanti, meaning peace 
Sharad, meaning Autumn 

Sharmishtha, pronounced sharmishthaa, the daughter of Vrishaparva 
Shashwat, pronounced shaashvat, meaning eternal. 
Shastras, pronounced shaastras, meaning the scriptures or religious texts 
Shauch, meaning cleanliness 

Shaunakadis, pronounced shaunakaadis, meaning Shaunak and others. 

Shesh, pronounced she'sh, meaning the thousand headed serpent upon whom the Lord 

Narayana reposes. Balaramji is considered to be the Shesh Avatar 

Shesha Bhagwan, pronounced she'sha bhagavaan, means the Lord, as His thousand 
headed serpent, upon whom He reclines, who abides during dissolution. 



371 



Sheshagufa, pronounced she'shgufaa, meaning the cave of Shesha, the thousand headed 
serpent upon who the Lord Vishnu reclines 

Sheshashaiya, pronounced she'shshaiyaa, meaning the thousand headed serpent, Shesha, 
upon which the Lord Narayana reclines 

Sheshnag, pronounced she'shnaag, meaning the thousand headed serpent upon whom 
the Lord Narayana reclines 
Shishupal, pronounced shishupaal 

Shiva Purana, pronounced shiv puraan, meaning the story of the Lord Shiva. 
Shivamahimnastotra is a famous poem, eulogizing the greatness of the Lord Shiva. 
Shloka, meaning couplet 
Shraadha, meaning rituals for ancestors 

Shraddha, pronounced shraddhaa, meaning faith with reverence 
Shrama, meaning labor 

Shravan means listening to discourses about the Lord or the scriptures, and imbuing 
their essence. 

Shravan, pronounced shraavan, the name of a lunar month. 

Shreedaamaacharit, meaning the life of Shreedamaa 

Shringar, pronounced shringaar, meaning romance or decoration 

Shriniketan, pronounced shreenike'tan, meaning the abode of Shree — Laxmi — the 
goddess of grace and prosperity 

Shripati, meaning Vishnu, the husband of Shree - Laxmi - the goddess of grace and 
prosperity 

Shrivatsa, meaning the litde ring of golden hair on the Lord's chest 
Shrivigraha means the beautiful body of the Lord, or His image 

Shrutis means divine messages heard directly by the ancient sages, verses of the Vedas 
Shuddha, meaning pure 
Shudra, a low caste, a laborer 
Shunya, meaning nihil 

Shyamsundar, pronounced syaamsundar, meaning blue-hued and beautiful Krishna 
Siddha purusha, meaning a person possessing super natural powers. 
Siddhi, meaning supernatural powers. 

Singhasana, pronounced singhaasan, meaning throne -like seat 

Skandha, the Shrimad Bhagwat is divided into twelve Skandhas, or cantos 

Smaran means remembering the Lord. 

Smart Dharma, pronounced smaart Dharma, meaning pertaining to the laws of the 
Smritis 

Sneha, pronounced sne'h, meaning affection 

Sparsha, meaning touch 

Srishti nyas, meaning the nyas of Creation. 

Srishti-drishti, meaning the world which is seen . 

Sthirtaa, meaning keeping still 

Sthiti nyas, meaning a nyas of through a state. 

Sthiti, meaning condition or state 

Stotra means a eulogizing verse. 

Stuti, meaning verses of praise. 

Sudarshan Chakra, the Lord's discus, called Sudarshan 
Sudas, pronounced sudaas 



372 



Sudharma Sabha, pronounced sudharmaa sabhaa, the name of the Court (or conference 

hall) of Shri Krishna, in Dwarka. 

Sukha, meaning happiness 

Surya Vansha, meaning the lineage of the sun 

Surya, meaning the Sun 

Suta, pronounced soota 

Sutal Loka, meaning the land called Sutal 

Svaadhyay, meaning study 

Svabhaav, meaning temperament 

Svajan-mohini Maya, meaning the Maya which affects those who are dear to the Lord. 

Svarga, meaning heaven 

Svarna Laxmi, the wealth of gold 

Sveta-dveep, pronounced sve't-dveep, meaning the white island 

Swaartha, meaning self interest 

Swami, pronounced svaami, meaning My Lord 

Swasti Vaachan, meaning the chanting of verses for inviting auspiciousness 
Swayambu means the self-created, a name of Brahma 
Swayamvara, meaning then the bride chooses the man she wants to marry 
Taapa, meaning penance, or religious auterilty 

Tadaka-vadh, pronounced taadkaa vadh, meaning the killing of Tadaka 

Taijas Hiranyagarbha, the individual self, while dreaming, is called Taijas, Hiranyagarbh is 

the totality of subtle experiences corresponding to the dream state. 

Tamasik, pronounced taamasik, means lowly tendencies 

Tamoguna is one of the three human tendencies. Tamoguna is filled with sloth and 
negativity. 

Tandav, pronounced taandav, meaning the dance of destruction 

Tanmatras, pronounced tanmaatraas, the subtle forms of the five elements. 

Tantras, meaning the mystical formulas for powers, sometimes used for negative results 

Tapa means to practice austerity, for spiritual achievement. 

Tapasya pronounced tapasyaa, means to practice asceticism 

Tat Padartha, meaning the 'That' factor 

Tat, meaning That 

Tattva dhyan, pronounced tattva dhyaan, means meditating on the essence. 

Tattva meaning element, essence or supreme reality 

Tattva vigyaan means the science of the Tattva, essence of the Lord. 

Tattvagnan , pronounced tattvagnan, meaning the knowledge (gnan) of the Brahman 

Tattvagnani, pronounced tattvagnaani, meaning a person who knows the essence of the 

Brahman 

Tatvamasi, a Vedic aphorism, meaning 'You' are 'That', teaching that the individual soul 
is not separate from the Brahman 

Teerthayatra, pronounced teerthyaatraa, meaning visiting places of pilgrimage 

Thread ceremony is a ritual for a boy, where the important Gayatri Mantra is given for 

spiritual progress. 

Til, meaning aniseed. 

Tilak, meaning a mark made on the forehead, or the most superior 
Tithi, meaning the lunar date. 
Titikshaa, meaning endurance 

Titikshu Brahmin, meaning the Brahmin with stoic endurance 



373 



Treta Yuga, pronounced tre'taa yug, meaning the eon of Time called Treta 
Trikaladarshi, pronounced trikaaldarshi, meaning one who has knowledge of the past, 
present and future 
Triloki, meaning three worlds 

Trinavarta, pronounced trinaavart, a demon who came in the form of a whirlwind. 

Trishul, pronounced trishool, meaning a three-pronged spear. 

Trivakra, pronounced trivakraa, meaning bent in three places 

Trivikram, meaning so immense that He filled all the three worlds 

Turiyapada brahmaikya means the ultimate, all-pervading essence of the entire creation 

Tvam padartha, pronounced tvam padaartha, meaning the 'You' factor 

Tvam, meaning You 

Tvam-pada, meaning the You factor 

Tvashtaa Devta, pronounced tvastaa deVtaa, meaning the demi god who is easily 

satisfied, and grants boons. 

Tyaga, pronounced tyaag, meaning giving up 

Ukhal bandhan, meaning tying the Lord to the pounding stone 

Ukhal, meaning pounding stone 

Ullu, meaning an owl, or a foolish person. 

Upadana, pronounced upaadaan, meaning basic matter. 

Upapatti means demonstration. 

Upasana shastras, pronounced upaasanaa shastras, meaning the religious texts of worship 
with devotion. 

Upasana, pronounced upaasanaa, meaning adoring worship 
Upendra, pronounced upe'ndra, meaning the junior Indra 
Utpatti means birth. 
Uttara, pronounced uttaraa 

Uttarayan, pronounced uttaraayan, meaning the bright period. 

Vaachyartha, meaning the meaning of the word 

Vaata, meaning weighing stone 

Vadhoo, meaning wife 

Vaibhav, meaning wealth 

Vaidya, Ayurvedic specialist 

Vaikunth means a heavenly place where there is no negativity, and that is where the Lord 
resides 

Vairagya marg, meaning the path of renunciation 

Vairagya, pronounced vairaagya, meaning detachment 

Vaishnav Purana, meaning a Purana pertaining to the Lord Vishnu 

Vaishnav, meaning those who worship the Lord as Vishnu. 

Vaishvanara, pronounced vaishvaanar 

Vaishya meaning the traders caste. 

Vajra, meaning thunderbolt 

Vajranabha, pronounced vajranaabh 

Vaman Avatar, pronounced vaamana avataar, means when the Lord descends upon 
earth as the litde Brahmin boy called Vaman. 
Van, pronounced vun, meaning forest 

Vana mala, pronounced vana maalaa, meaning a garland of wild flowers 

Vanaprastha Ashrama, pronounced vaanaprastha aashram, meaning the stage in life 

where the householder gets detached from the world and lives like an ascetic. 



374 



Vanasura, pronounced vaanaasur 

Vanvasis, pronounced vanvaasees, meaning those who live in the forest 

Varaha, pronounce varaah, the boar form of the Lord. 

Varenya, pronounced vare'nya, meaning worth accepting 

Varmala, pronounced varmaalaa, meaning the bridal garland 

Varna Dharma, meaning the Dharma for the four castes 

Varnas, meaning castes 

Varnashrama Dharma, pronounced varnaashram dharm, meaning the Dharm prescribed 
for the different Castes and stages of life 
Varuna loka, meaning the land of Varuna 
Vasant, meaning Spring 

Vasudev Bhagwat, pronounced vaasudeV bhaagwat, meaning the Bhagwat about 
Vasudev Shri Krishna 

Vasudev, pronounced vaasudeV, the Lord who abides in all, a name of Shri Krishna 
Vatsalya, pronounced vaatsalya, meaning motherly love 
Vedanta, pronounced ve'daant, meaning the purport of the Vedas 

Vedantis, pronounced ve'dantees, meaning those who believe in the theory of the Vedas, 
that everything is the Brahman, i.e. the non-dual reality 
Vedic, pronounced ve'dik, meaning of the Vedas. 
Veena, meaning a stringed instrument 

Veer Sannyas, pronounced veer sanyaas, a system by which a warrior gives up worldly 
life. 

Veerya means the seed of procreation, or manliness 

Venu Geet, pronounced ve'nu geet, meaning the song of the flute 

Vibhutis, meaning glories 

Vidai, meaning the time of departure 

Videhamukti, pronounced vide'hamukti, meaning having attained liberation outside the 

body. It is gained on death 

Vidharma, meaning against Dharma 

Vidhata, pronounced vidhaataa, meaning Providence 

Vidhi-nishedh, pronounced vishi-nishe'dh, meaning recommended and forbidden 
actions 

Vidvan, pronounced vidvaan, meaning a learned person 

Vidya, pronounced vidyaa, meaning knowledge or science, combined with wisdom 

Vidyadhar, pronounced vidyaadhar, meaning a celestial being 

Vigraha, meaning division, or struggle 

Vigyanmay means the intellectual sheath 

Vijalpa, meaning wild talk 

Vikalpa chitta means fluctuation indecision. 

Vikara, pronounced vikaar, meaning mutations in our nature. 

Vikarma, meaning negative actions 

Vikritis, meaning mutations. 

Vikshepanand, pronounced vikshe'panand, meaning the joy of disturbances. 
Vimukh-mohini Maya, meaning the Maya which deludes those who are turned away 
from the Lord. 
Vinay, meaning humility 

Viraha, meaning the sorrow of being separated from the beloved 
Virakta, meaning detached 



375 



Virat Chaitanya, pronounced viraat chaitanya, meaning the Universal spirit 

Virat Purusha, pronounced viraat purush, meaning the immense form of the Lord, 

which is the whole universe 

Virat, pronounced viraat, meaning immense, all-pervading 

Visarga means dis-union. 

Vish, meaning poison 

Vishaya, objects of sense organs 

Vishishtadvait, meaning Pure Non-duality. 

Vishwajit, meaning victory over the world 

Vishwakarma, pronounced vishwakarmaa, meaning the one who creates everything in 
the world 

Vishwatma, pronounced vishwaatmaa, meaning the Soul of the universe 

Vivek, pronounced vive'k, meaning discrimination, the ability to separate the real from 

the illusionary 

Viyoga, meaning pangs of separation 

Vraja, meaning the entire region around Vrindavan. 

Vrajaraj Kumar, pronounced vrajraaj kumaar, meaning the son of the King of Vraja 

Vrajavasis, pronounced vrajavaasis, meaning those who live in Vraja 

Vrat, meaning a vow 

Vrihaspati, the Guru of the Devtas 

Vrishabh, meaning bull 

Vrishabhanu, pronounced vrishabhaanu 

Vritrasura, pronounced vritraasur. 

Vyapak nyas, pronounced vyaapak nyas, meaning an all pervading nyas. 
Vyas, pronounced vyaas 

Vyatirek, pronounced vyatire'k, meaning variation 
Yaduvanshi, meaning of the lineage of Yadu 

Yagnik Brahmins, pronounced yaagnik braahmins, meaning the Brahmins doing the 

Yagya 

Yagya is a ritual fire worship, an offering to the Devtas 
Yagya Mandap, meaning the site of the Yagya 

Yagya patnis, pronounced yagya patnees, meaning the wives of those who were doing 
the yagya 

Yagya Pradhan, pronounced yagya pradhaan, meaning predominandy action oriented 
Yagyashala, pronounced yagyashaalaa, meaning the place where the yagya is held. 
Yagyopaveet Sanskar, pronounced yagyopaveet sanskaar, meaning the thread ceremony 
Yagyopavit, meaning the sacred thread 

Yajamaan, pronounced yajmaan, meaning the one who undertakes and pays for the 
yagya. 

Yaksha means an ugly, strong, rich, celestial being. 

Yama, meaning the Lord of Death. It also means abstentions or ethical restraints. 
Yamadutas, pronounced yumdoots, meaning the messengers of Yama. 
Yamaloka, meaning the land of Yama, the Lord of Death 
Yama-niyama, meaning control of sense organs and a controlled lifestyle 
Yamaraj, pronounced yamraaj, meaning King of Death 

Yamunaji, pronounced yamunaaji, meaning the river Yamuna, whose subde form is a 
divine woman. 
Yash, meaning fame 



376 



Yashoda Lai, pronounced yashodaa laal, meaning the darling of Yashoda. 
Yashoda Maiya, meaning Mother Yashoda. 
Yashoda Nandan, meaning the son of Yashoda. 

Yoga Darshan, the eight steps to Yoga as prescribed by Sage Patanjali 
Yoga Maya, pronounced yog maayaa, meaning the Lord's power of illusion 
Yoga means yoking ourselves with the Lord. It also means the power of the Lord, 
applied to the world. Yoga is one of the six schools of philosophy, and also refers to 
powers developed through Yogic exercises. 

Yoga nidra, pronounced yog nidraa, means a deep meditation akin to a deep slumber 

Yoga-bhoga, meaning offerings of ascetic worship, or luxuries 

Yogagni, meaning a fire created with spiritual power. 

Yoga-nidra, pronounced yog-nidraa, the sleep of the Lord 

Yogeshwara, pronounced yoge'shwar, meaning the Lord of Yogis 

Yogishwara, meaning the best of the Yogis 

Yuga, the cycle of Time is divided into four Yugas or ages, Satya, Treta, Dvapar and Kali 
Yugal Geet, meaning duet 



377 



